A research agenda for ageing in China in the 21st century (2nd edition): 
Focusing on basic and translational research, long-term care, policy and social 
networks.

A Risk Prediction Model Based on Machine Learning for Cognitive Impairment Among 
Chinese Community-Dwelling Elderly People With Normal Cognition: Development and 
Validation Study.

The paradigm and future value of the metaverse for the intervention of cognitive 
decline.

Prediction of disability-free survival in healthy older people.

Use of machine learning approach to predict depression in the elderly in China: 
A longitudinal study.

A combination model of AD biomarkers revealed by machine learning precisely 
predicts Alzheimer's dementia: China Aging and Neurodegenerative Initiative 
(CANDI) study.

Artificial intelligence approaches to predicting and detecting cognitive decline 
in older adults: A conceptual review.

[Use AI for Dementia Diagnosis].

Develop a diagnostic tool for dementia using machine learning and non-imaging 
features.

Machine Learning and Prediction in Fetal, Infant, and Toddler Neuroimaging: A 
Review and Primer.

Prediction of Incident Dementia Using Patient Temporal Health Status.

A Machine-Learning-Based Analysis of the Relationships between Loneliness 
Metrics and Mobility Patterns for Elderly.

Eye Movements in Neuropsychological Tasks.

Progression in Neuroimaging of Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus.

Graph Representation Learning-Based Early Depression Detection Framework in 
Smart Home Environments.

Detection of Dementia Signals from Longitudinal Clinical Visits Using One-Class 
Classification.

Machine Learning Prediction of Treatment Outcome in Late-Life Depression.

Early-Stage Alzheimer's Disease Prediction Using Machine Learning Models.

Machine learning functional impairment classification with electronic health 
record data.

36th International Symposium on Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine : 
Brussels, Belgium. 15-18 March 2016.

Predicting Cognitive Impairment and Dementia: A Machine Learning Approach.

Radiomics and Artificial Intelligence for the Diagnosis and Monitoring of 
Alzheimer's Disease: A Systematic Review of Studies in the Field.

Technology for Early Detection of Depression and Anxiety in Older People.

Radiological classification of dementia from anatomical MRI assisted by machine 
learning-derived maps.

Utilizing Machine Learning to Recognize Human Activities for Elderly and 
Homecare.

Machine learning can predict mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Evaluation and Analysis of Elderly Mental Health Based on Artificial 
Intelligence.

Machine Learning Prediction of Suicide Risk Does Not Identify Patients Without 
Traditional Risk Factors.

Cardiometabolic Conditions and All-Cause Dementia Among American Indian and 
Alaska Native People.

Speech and language characteristics differentiate Alzheimer's disease and 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

Machine learning discovery of longitudinal patterns of depression and suicidal 
ideation.

Explainable Fall Risk Prediction in Older Adults Using Gait and Geriatric 
Assessments.

Evaluating Voice-Assistant Commands for Dementia Detection.

The Road to Personalized Medicine in Alzheimer's Disease: The Use of Artificial 
Intelligence.

Longitudinal Study-Based Dementia Prediction for Public Health.

Testamentary capacity assessment in dementia using artificial intelligence: 
prospects and challenges.

Vocal pattern detection of depression among older adults.

Continuous Neurophysiologic Data Accurately Predict Mood and Energy in the 
Elderly.

Questionnaire-free machine-learning method to predict depressive symptoms among 
community-dwelling older adults.

A hybrid machine learning model of depression estimation in home-based older 
adults: a 7-year follow-up study.

Multifactorial 10-Year Prior Diagnosis Prediction Model of Dementia.

Natural Language Processing as an Emerging Tool to Detect Late-Life Depression.

A Comparative Analysis of Machine Learning Algorithms to Predict Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Current Trends of Computational Tools in Geriatric Medicine and Frailty 
Management.

Identification of marker genes in Alzheimer's disease using a machine-learning 
model.

A Machine Learning Approach for Walking Classification in Elderly People with 
Gait Disorders.

Artificial Intelligence: An Interprofessional Perspective on Implications for 
Geriatric Mental Health Research and Care.

Improving Machine Learning 30-Day Mortality Prediction by Discounting Surprising 
Deaths.

Predicting Depression Among Community Residing Older Adults: A Use of Machine 
Learning Approch.

Eigenbehaviour as an Indicator of Cognitive Abilities.

Cardiovascular risk prediction in healthy older people.

Development of a Suicide Prediction Model for the Elderly Using Health Screening 
Data.

Dementia medical screening using mobile applications: A systematic review with a 
new mapping model.

Risk factors and machine learning model for predicting hospitalization outcomes 
in geriatric patients with dementia.

Public Discourse and Sentiment Toward Dementia on Chinese Social Media: Machine 
Learning Analysis of Weibo Posts.

Development of a depression in Parkinson's disease prediction model using 
machine learning.

Validity of three risk prediction models for dementia or cognitive impairment in 
Australia.

Multimodal brain age estimates relate to Alzheimer disease biomarkers and 
cognition in early stages: a cross-sectional observational study.

Predicting depression among rural and urban disabled elderly in China using a 
random forest classifier.

Do Words Matter? Detecting Social Isolation and Loneliness in Older Adults Using 
Natural Language Processing.

Diagnostic Model of Alzheimer's Disease in the Elderly Based on Protein and 
Metabolic Biomarkers.

Machine-learning prediction for hospital length of stay using a French 
medico-administrative database.

Using Machine Learning to Predict Cognitive Impairment Among Middle-Aged and 
Older Chinese: A Longitudinal Study.

Medical Health Records-Based Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) Prediction for 
Effective Dementia Care.

Potential Ocular Biomarkers for Early Detection of Alzheimer's Disease and Their 
Roles in Artificial Intelligence Studies.

Developing a machine learning model to identify delirium risk in geriatric 
internal medicine inpatients.

Improved Alzheimer's Disease Detection by MRI Using Multimodal Machine Learning 
Algorithms.

What influences individual perception of health? Using machine learning to 
disentangle self-perceived health.

Internet of Things and Machine Learning for Healthy Ageing: Identifying the 
Early Signs of Dementia.

Research on nonstroke dementia screening and cognitive function prediction model 
for older people based on brain atrophy characteristics.

A Novel Approach Utilizing Machine Learning for the Early Diagnosis of 
Alzheimer's Disease.

Machine learning approach for early onset dementia neurobiomarker using EEG 
network topology features.

Dementia detection from brain activity during sleep.

Comparison of Regression and Machine Learning Methods in Depression Forecasting 
Among Home-Based Elderly Chinese: A Community Based Study.

Machine Learning-Based Prediction of Functional Disability: a Cohort Study of 
Japanese Older Adults in 2013-2019.

Hippocampal atrophy based Alzheimer's disease diagnosis via machine learning 
methods.

Predicting Future Mobility Limitation in Older Adults: A Machine Learning 
Analysis of Health ABC Study Data.

Developing Machine Learning Algorithms for the Prediction of Early Death in 
Elderly Cancer Patients: Usability Study.

Machine Learning Analysis Reveals Novel Neuroimaging and Clinical Signatures of 
Frailty in HIV.

Effects of medical and non-medical cannabis use in older adults: protocol for a 
scoping review.

Comparison of machine learning approaches for enhancing Alzheimer's disease 
classification.

Forecasting call and chat volumes at online helplines for mental health.

Identifying the presence and severity of dementia by applying interpretable 
machine learning techniques on structured clinical records.

Stack Ensemble Oriented Parkinson Disease Prediction Using Machine Learning 
Approaches Utilizing GridSearchCV-Based Hyper Parameter Tuning.

Application of machine learning techniques for dementia severity prediction from 
psychometric tests in the elderly population.

Explainable Machine Learning Model to Predict COVID-19 Severity Among Older 
Adults in the Province of Quebec.

Melancholia defined with the precision of a machine.

Neurotechnology and AI Approach for Early Dementia Onset Biomarker from EEG in 
Emotional Stimulus Evaluation Task.

CERAD-NAB and flexible battery based neuropsychological differentiation of 
Alzheimer's dementia and depression using machine learning approaches.

A Machine Learning Approach to Identifying Placebo Responders in Late-Life 
Depression Trials.

An Intelligent Learning System for Unbiased Prediction of Dementia Based on 
Autoencoder and Adaboost Ensemble Learning.

Machine learning-assisted screening for cognitive impairment in the emergency 
department.

Outdoor life in dementia: How predictable are people with dementia in their 
mobility?

Using Unsupervised Machine Learning to Identify Subgroups Among Home Health 
Patients With Heart Failure Using Telehealth.

Individual prediction and classification of cognitive impairment in patients 
with white matter lesions based on gray matter volume.

Machine learning-based algorithms to predict severe psychological distress among 
cancer patients with spinal metastatic disease.

The DynAIRx Project Protocol: Artificial Intelligence for dynamic prescribing 
optimisation and care integration in multimorbidity.

Estimating the Prevalence of Dementia in India Using a Semi-Supervised Machine 
Learning Approach.

Individualized prediction of depressive disorder in the elderly: A multitask 
deep learning approach.

Using machine learning to improve diagnostic assessment of ASD in the light of 
specific differential and co-occurring diagnoses.

Machine learning for predicting neurodegenerative diseases in the general older 
population: a cohort study.

Using CatBoost algorithm to identify middle-aged and elderly depression, 
national health and nutrition examination survey 2011-2018.

Sleep EEG-Based Approach to Detect Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Diagnosis of Dementia by Machine learning methods in Epidemiological studies: a 
pilot exploratory study from south India.

Brain amyloid and the transition to dementia in Down syndrome.

Uncovering heterogeneous associations of disaster-related traumatic experiences 
with subsequent mental health problems: A machine learning approach.

Using the NANA toolkit at home to predict older adults' future depression.

Analysis of Factors Affecting Depression in Older Adults in South Korea.

Machine Learning Models Reveal the Importance of Clinical Biomarkers for the 
Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease.

Predictors of Improvements in Mental Health From Mindfulness Meditation in 
Stressed Older Adults.

Machine Learning Algorithm Using Electronic Chart-Derived Data to Predict 
Delirium After Elderly Hip Fracture Surgeries: A Retrospective Case-Control 
Study.

Big health data for elderly employees job performance of SOEs: visionary and 
enticing challenges.

A classification algorithm to predict chronic pain using both regression and 
machine learning - A stepwise approach.

Predicting amyloid-beta pathology in the general population.

Toward Sensor-Based Early Diagnosis of Cognitive Impairment using Poisson 
Process Models.

Neuropsychological test selection for cognitive impairment classification: A 
machine learning approach.

Estimation of the epidemiology of dementia and associated neuropsychiatric 
symptoms by applying machine learning to real-world data.

Development and Structure of an Accurate Machine Learning Algorithm to Predict 
Inpatient Mortality and Hospice Outcomes in the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Era.

Alzheimer's Disease Detection Through Whole-Brain 3D-CNN MRI.

A Study of Dementia Prediction Models Based on Machine Learning with Survey Data 
of Community-Dwelling Elderly People in China.

Passive digital markers for Alzheimer's disease and other related dementias: A 
systematic evidence review.

A Comparison of Deep Learning Techniques for Arterial Blood Pressure Prediction.

Predicting persistent depressive symptoms in older adults: A machine learning 
approach to personalised mental healthcare.

Predictors of attrition in a longitudinal population-based study of aging.

Wearable multimodal sensors for the detection of behavioral and psychological 
symptoms of dementia using personalized machine learning models.

Using Hypothesis-Led Machine Learning and Hierarchical Cluster Analysis to 
Identify Disease Pathways Prior to Dementia: Longitudinal Cohort Study.

Detection of Talking in Respiratory Signals: A Feasibility Study Using Machine 
Learning and Wearable Textile-Based Sensors.

Associations Between Substance Use and Instagram Participation to Inform Social 
Network-Based Screening Models: Multimodal Cross-Sectional Study.

Social Reminiscence in Older Adults' Everyday Conversations: Automated Detection 
Using Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning.

Cardiometabolic risk factors associated with brain age and accelerate brain 
ageing.

Development and validation of new screening tool for predicting dementia risk in 
community-dwelling older Japanese adults.

Identifying High-Need Primary Care Patients Using Nursing Knowledge and Machine 
Learning Methods.

A dynamic decision model for diagnosis of dementia, Alzheimer's disease and Mild 
Cognitive Impairment.

Modeling Users' Cognitive Performance Using Digital Pen Features.

A review on omics-based biomarkers discovery for Alzheimer's disease from the 
bioinformatics perspectives: Statistical approach vs machine learning approach.

Estimation of the epidemiology of dementia and associated neuropsychiatric 
symptoms by applying machine learning to real-world data.

Prediction of depressive symptoms onset and long-term trajectories in home-based 
older adults using machine learning techniques.

TraMiner: Vision-Based Analysis of Locomotion Traces for Cognitive Assessment in 
Smart-Homes.

Machine learning models of plasma proteomic data predict mood in chronic stroke 
and tie it to aberrant peripheral immune responses.

Boosting Delirium Identification Accuracy With Sentiment-Based Natural Language 
Processing: Mixed Methods Study.

Smart-Data-Driven System for Alzheimer Disease Detection through 
Electroencephalographic Signals.

Machine learning-based predictive models for the occurrence of behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia: model development and validation.

Application of novel hybrid machine learning systems and radiomics features for 
non-motor outcome prediction in Parkinson's disease.

Development and validation of the Chinese Geriatric Depression Risk calculator 
(CGD-risk): A screening tool to identify elderly Chinese with depression.

Alzheimer's Disease Detection Using Comprehensive Analysis of Timed Up and Go 
Test via Kinect V.2 Camera and Machine Learning.

Predicting restriction of life-space mobility: a machine learning analysis of 
the IMIAS study.

Simple action for depression detection: using kinect-recorded human kinematic 
skeletal data.

Prognosis of Alzheimer's Disease Using Quantitative Mass Spectrometry of Human 
Blood Plasma Proteins and Machine Learning.

Generational differences in loneliness and its psychological and 
sociodemographic predictors: an exploratory and confirmatory machine learning 
study.

Identification of Suicide Attempt Risk Factors in a National US Survey Using 
Machine Learning.

Machine Learning to Develop and Internally Validate a Predictive Model for 
Post-operative Delirium in a Prospective, Observational Clinical Cohort Study of 
Older Surgical Patients.

Assessing the Current State of Cognitive Frailty: Measurement Properties.

DOI: 10.1007/s12603-016-0735-9
PMID: 28112769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Suicide Among Older Adults Living in or Transitioning to Residential Long-term 
Care, 2003 to 2015.

Factors Associated with American Indian Mental Health Service Use in Comparison 
with White Older Adults.

Hierarchical and nested associations of suicide with marriage, social support, 
quality of life, and depression among the elderly in rural China: Machine 
learning of psychological autopsy data.

Adhering to COVID-19 health guidelines: Examining demographic and psychological 
predictors of adherence.

Automated Classification of Normal Control and Early-Stage Dementia Based on 
Activities of Daily Living (ADL) Data Acquired from Smart Home Environment.

Brain-age is associated with progression to dementia in memory clinic patients.

Automatic diagnosis of late-life depression by 3D convolutional neural networks 
and cross-sample Entropy analysis from resting-state fMRI.

Inequities in Mental Health Care Facing Racialized Immigrant Older Adults With 
Mental Disorders Despite Universal Coverage: A Population-Based Study in Canada.

A dominant set-informed interpretable fuzzy system for automated diagnosis of 
dementia.

Characteristics of Drawing Process Differentiate Alzheimer's Disease and 
Dementia with Lewy Bodies.

Early Prediction of Dementia Using Feature Extraction Battery (FEB) and 
Optimized Support Vector Machine (SVM) for Classification.

Data-driven discovery of probable Alzheimer's disease and related dementia 
subphenotypes using electronic health records.

Associating persistent self-reported cognitive decline with neurocognitive 
decline in older breast cancer survivors using machine learning: The Thinking 
and Living with Cancer study.

The Influence of Social Support on the Mental Health of Elderly Individuals in 
Healthy Communities with the Framework of Mental Toughness.

Addressing Mild Cognitive Impairment and Boosting Wellness for the Elderly 
through Personalized Remote Monitoring.

Dementia Digital Neuro-biomarker Study from Theta-band EEG Fluctuation Analysis 
in Facial and Emotional Identification Short-term Memory Oddball Paradigm.

Development and validation of an automated HIV prediction algorithm to identify 
candidates for pre-exposure prophylaxis: a modelling study.

Exploring the most important factors related to self-perceived health among 
older men in Sweden: a cross-sectional study using machine learning.

Deep learning-based predictions of older adults' adherence to cognitive training 
to support training efficacy.

Identifying Individuals Who Currently Report Feelings of Anxiety Using Walking 
Gait and Quiet Balance: An Exploratory Study Using Machine Learning.

Depression management interests among Alaska Native and American Indian adults 
in primary care.

AI-Assisted In-House Power Monitoring for the Detection of Cognitive Impairment 
in Older Adults.

Methamphetamine use among American Indians and Alaska Natives in the United 
States.

Examining spoken words and acoustic features of therapy sessions to understand 
family caregivers' anxiety and quality of life.

Automated Cognitive Health Assessment Based on Daily Life Functional Activities.

Depression Prediction by Using Ecological Momentary Assessment, Actiwatch Data, 
and Machine Learning: Observational Study on Older Adults Living Alone.

Predicting Amyloid Positivity in Cognitively Unimpaired Older Adults: A Machine 
Learning Approach Using A4 Data.

Measuring neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients with early cognitive decline 
using speech analysis.

Gender-Based Analysis of Risk Factors for Dementia Using Senior Cohort.

Development of Internet suicide message identification and the 
Monitoring-Tracking-Rescuing model in Taiwan.

Smart Home Sensing and Monitoring in Households With Dementia: User-Centered 
Design Approach.

A Machine Learning Approach for Investigating Delirium as a Multifactorial 
Syndrome.

Digital Biomarkers for the Early Detection of Mild Cognitive Impairment: 
Artificial Intelligence Meets Virtual Reality.

Relative importance of symptoms, cognition, and other multilevel variables for 
psychiatric disease classifications by machine learning.

Proportional Changes in Cognitive Subdomains During Normal Brain Aging.

Identifying depression in the United States veterans using deep learning 
algorithms, NHANES 2005-2018.

Factors Associated with the Use of Meditation, U.S. Adults 2017.

Predicting the long-term cognitive trajectories using machine learning 
approaches: A Chinese nationwide longitudinal database.

A Virtual Agent to Support Individuals Living With Physical and Mental 
Comorbidities: Co-Design and Acceptability Testing.

Prediction of Decline in Global Cognitive Function Using Machine Learning with 
Feature Ranking of Gait and Physical Fitness Outcomes in Older Adults.

Modifiable predictors of nonresponse to psychotherapies for late-life depression 
with executive dysfunction: a machine learning approach.

A risk model to predict the mental health of older people in Chinese communities 
based on machine learning.

Exploring Factors for Predicting Anxiety Disorders of the Elderly Living Alone 
in South Korea Using Interpretable Machine Learning: A Population-Based Study.

Modifiable predictors of suicidal ideation during psychotherapy for late-life 
major depression. A machine learning approach.

Efficient optimization based thresholding technique for analysis of alzheimer 
MRIs.

Classification of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment Based on 
Cortical and Subcortical Features from MRI T1 Brain Images Utilizing Four 
Different Types of Datasets.

One-Class Classification-Based Real-Time Activity Error Detection in Smart 
Homes.

A model for predicting fall risks of hospitalized elderly in Taiwan-A machine 
learning approach based on both electronic health records and comprehensive 
geriatric assessment.

Using artificial neural networks to select the parameters for the prognostic of 
mild cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly individuals.

Investigating Predictors of Preserved Cognitive Function in Older Women Using 
Machine Learning: Women's Health Initiative Memory Study.

Utility of Machine Learning Approach with Neuropsychological Tests in Predicting 
Functional Impairment of Alzheimer's Disease.

Automated voxel- and region-based analysis of gray matter and cerebrospinal 
fluid space in primary dementia disorders.

Longitudinal Patterns of Engagement and Clinical Outcomes: Results From a 
Therapist-Supported Digital Mental Health Intervention.

Using Naturalistic Driving Data to Predict Mild Cognitive Impairment and 
Dementia: Preliminary Findings from the Longitudinal Research on Aging Drivers 
(LongROAD) Study.

Detecting Apathy in Older Adults with Cognitive Disorders Using Automatic Speech 
Analysis.

Forecasting the Suitability of Online Mental Health Information for Effective 
Self-Care Developing Machine Learning Classifiers Using Natural Language 
Features.

Machine learning approaches for integrating clinical and imaging features in 
late-life depression classification and response prediction.

Separating Symptomatic Alzheimer's Disease from Depression based on Structural 
MRI.

Automated Video Analysis of Audio-Visual Approaches to Predict and Detect Mild 
Cognitive Impairment and Dementia in Older Adults.

Digital detection of dementia (D(3)): a study protocol for a pragmatic 
cluster-randomized trial examining the application of patient-reported outcomes 
and passive clinical decision support systems.

Developing a machine learning model for detecting depression, anxiety, and 
apathy in older adults with mild cognitive impairment using speech and facial 
expressions: A cross-sectional observational study.

A non-invasive method for prediction of neurodegenerative diseases using gait 
signal features.

Developing Acute Event Risk Profiles for Older Adults with Dementia in Long-Term 
Care Using Motor Behavior Clusters Derived from Deep Learning.

Artificial intelligence system, based on mjn-SERAS algorithm, for the early 
detection of seizures in patients with refractory focal epilepsy: A 
cross-sectional pilot study.

Prediction of Recurrence-associated Death from Localized Prostate Cancer with a 
Charlson Comorbidity Index-reinforced Machine Learning Model.

The TAS Test project: a prospective longitudinal validation of new online 
motor-cognitive tests to detect preclinical Alzheimer's disease and estimate 
5-year risks of cognitive decline and dementia.

© 2022. The Author(s).

Investigating predictive factors of dialectical behavior therapy skills training 
efficacy for alcohol and concurrent substance use disorders: A machine learning 
study.

Prediction of depression onset risk among middle-aged and elderly adults using 
machine learning and Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging cohort.

Automated Smart Home Assessment to Support Pain Management: Multiple Methods 
Analysis.

Identifying Key Predictors of Cognitive Dysfunction in Older People Using 
Supervised Machine Learning Techniques: Observational Study.

Leading Predictors of COVID-19-Related Poor Mental Health in Adult Asian 
Indians: An Application of Extreme Gradient Boosting and Shapley Additive 
Explanations.

Sedentary Behavior and Incident Dementia Among Older Adults.

Comparing Pre-trained and Feature-Based Models for Prediction of Alzheimer's 
Disease Based on Speech.

Detecting Amyloid Positivity in Elderly With Increased Risk of Cognitive 
Decline.

Sleep Quality in an Adult American Indian Community Sample.

Predicting depressive symptoms in middle-aged and elderly adults using sleep 
data and clinical health markers: A machine learning approach.

GPS driving: a digital biomarker for preclinical Alzheimer disease.

Detecting mild cognitive impairment and dementia in older adults using 
naturalistic driving data and interaction-based classification from influence 
score.

Association of blood lipids with Alzheimer's disease: A comprehensive lipidomics 
analysis.

Diné (Navajo) Female Perspectives on Mother-Daughter Cultural Assets Around the 
Transition to Womanhood: A Qualitative Study.

Patterns of Healthcare Use and Mortality After Alzheimer's Disease or Related 
Dementia Diagnosis Among Alaska Native Patients: Results of a Cluster Analysis 
in a Tribal Healthcare Setting.

Estimating Health-Related Quality of Life Based on Demographic Characteristics, 
Questionnaires, Gait Ability, and Physical Fitness in Korean Elderly Adults.

Questionnaires for the Assessment of Cognitive Function Secondary to Intake 
Interviews in In-Hospital Work and Development and Evaluation of a 
Classification Model Using Acoustic Features.

Application of Machine Learning Technique to Distinguish Parkinson's Disease 
Dementia and Alzheimer's Dementia: Predictive Power of Parkinson's 
Disease-Related Non-Motor Symptoms and Neuropsychological Profile.

Individual differences in socioemotional sensitivity are an index of salience 
network function.

Development of a clinical support system for identifying social frailty.

Classifying Cognitive Profiles Using Machine Learning with Privileged 
Information in Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Corrigendum: Using Machine Learning to Predict Cognitive Impairment Among 
Middle-Aged and Older Chinese: A Longitudinal Study.

Independent replication of advanced brain age in mild cognitive impairment and 
dementia: detection of future cognitive dysfunction.

Effects of accelerated biological age on depressive symptoms in a causal 
reasoning framework.

Subjective and objective sleep and circadian parameters as predictors of 
depression-related outcomes: A machine learning approach in UK Biobank.

Chest radiograph-based artificial intelligence predictive model for mortality in 
community-acquired pneumonia.

Hospitalization-Associated Disability After Cardiac Surgery in Elderly 
Patients　- Exploring the Risk Factors Using Machine Learning Algorithms.

Long-term trajectories of depressive symptoms and machine learning techniques 
for fall prediction in older adults: Evidence from the China Health and 
Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS).

Using Dual Neural Network Architecture to Detect the Risk of Dementia With 
Community Health Data: Algorithm Development and Validation Study.

Agile Requirements Engineering and Software Planning for a Digital Health 
Platform to Engage the Effects of Isolation Caused by Social Distancing: Case 
Study.

Risk and Protective Factors of Current Opioid Use Among Youth Living on or Near 
American Indian Reservations: An Application of Machine Learning.

Frailty, Comorbidity, and Associations With In-Hospital Mortality in Older 
COVID-19 Patients: Exploratory Study of Administrative Data.

Use and Acceptance of Digital Communication Technology by Older Adults for 
Social Connectedness During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Mixed Methods Study.

Ensemble of random forests One vs. Rest classifiers for MCI and AD prediction 
using ANOVA cortical and subcortical feature selection and partial least 
squares.

Aging faster: worry and rumination in late life are associated with greater 
brain age.

Autonomous unobtrusive detection of mild cognitive impairment in older adults.

Patterns of structure-function association in normal aging and in Alzheimer's 
disease: Screening for mild cognitive impairment and dementia with ML regression 
and classification models.

Use of Patient-Reported Symptoms from an Online Symptom Tracking Tool for 
Dementia Severity Staging: Development and Validation of a Machine Learning 
Approach.

Alzheimer's Disease Microbiome Is Associated with Dysregulation of the 
Anti-Inflammatory P-Glycoprotein Pathway.

Discriminating Heterogeneous Trajectories of Resilience and Depression After 
Major Life Stressors Using Polygenic Scores.

Quickly identifying people at risk of opioid use disorder in emergency 
departments: trade-offs between a machine learning approach and a simple EHR 
flag strategy.

Temporal Irreversibility of Large-Scale Brain Dynamics in Alzheimer's Disease.

Important Correlates of Purpose in Life Identified Through a Machine Learning 
Approach.

Prediction of Loneliness in Older Adults Using Natural Language Processing: 
Exploring Sex Differences in Speech.

A Nonlinear Simulation Framework Supports Adjusting for Age When Analyzing 
BrainAGE.

Touchscreen games to detect cognitive impairment in senior adults. A 
user-interaction pilot study.

Recalibrating the epigenetic clock: implications for assessing biological age in 
the human cortex.

Classification of Alzheimer's disease stage using machine learning for left and 
right oxygenation difference signals in the prefrontal cortex: a patient-level, 
single-group, diagnostic interventional trial.

Relevance of Complaint Severity in Predicting the Progression of Subjective 
Cognitive Decline and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Machine Learning Approach.

Stratifying risk for dementia onset using large-scale electronic health record 
data: A retrospective cohort study.

Digital Guardian Angel Supported by an Artificial Intelligence System to Improve 
Quality of Life, Well-being, and Health Outcomes of Patients With Cancer 
(ONCORELIEF): Protocol for a Single Arm Prospective Multicenter Pilot Study.

Correlations Between Facial Expressivity and Apathy in Elderly People With 
Neurocognitive Disorders: Exploratory Study.

Retinal image analytics detects white matter hyperintensities in healthy adults.

Predicting Serum Levels of Lithium-Treated Patients: A Supervised Machine 
Learning Approach.

Public Opinions on Using Social Media Content to Identify Users With Depression 
and Target Mental Health Care Advertising: Mixed Methods Survey.

Problematic internet use as an age-related multifaceted problem: Evidence from a 
two-site survey.

Machine learning-augmented objective functional testing in the degenerative 
spine: quantifying impairment using patient-specific five-repetition 
sit-to-stand assessment.

Functional connectivity of white matter as a biomarker of cognitive decline in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Decision Tree for Early Detection of Cognitive Impairment by Community 
Pharmacists.

A new tool for the evaluation of the rehabilitation outcomes in older persons: a 
machine learning model to predict functional status 1 year ahead.

Personalized screening and risk profiles for Mild Cognitive Impairment via a 
Machine Learning Framework: Implications for general practice.

Identification of a 6-RBP gene signature for a comprehensive analysis of glioma 
and ischemic stroke: Cognitive impairment and aging-related hypoxic stress.

Diagnosing attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) using artificial 
intelligence: a clinical study in the UK.

Identification of High Likelihood of Dementia in Population-Based Surveys using 
Unsupervised Clustering: a Longitudinal Analysis.

A machine-learning algorithm for predicting brain age using Rey-Osterrieth 
complex figure tests of healthy participants.

Natural Language Processing for the Identification of Silent Brain Infarcts From 
Neuroimaging Reports.

Illness and intelligence are comparatively strong predictors of individual 
differences in depressive symptoms following middle age.

Patient Determinants for Histologic Diagnosis of NAFLD in the Real World: A 
TARGET-NASH Study.

Computer-Aided Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease through Weak Supervision Deep 
Learning Framework with Attention Mechanism.

Multiscale structural mapping of Alzheimer's disease neurodegeneration.

Can Machines Find the Bilingual Advantage? Machine Learning Algorithms Find No 
Evidence to Differentiate Between Lifelong Bilingual and Monolingual Cognitive 
Profiles.

Estimating causal effects of physical disability and number of comorbid chronic 
diseases on risk of depressive symptoms in an elderly Chinese population: a 
machine learning analysis of cross-sectional baseline data from the China 
longitudinal ageing social survey.

The stage-specifically accelerated brain aging in never-treated first-episode 
patients with depression.

Development of a Conceptual Framework for Severe Self-Neglect (SN) by Modifying 
the CREST Model for Self-Neglect.

Identifying sex-specific risk architectures for predicting amyloid deposition 
using neural networks.

Circulating Plasma Metabolites and Cognitive Function in a Puerto Rican Cohort.

The Developmental Brain Age Is Associated With Adversity, Depression, and 
Functional Outcomes Among Adolescents.

Classifying Mild Cognitive Impairment from Behavioral Responses in Emotional 
Arousal and Valence Evaluation Task - AI Approach for Early Dementia Biomarker 
in Aging Societies.

Demographic Predictors of Dropping Out of Treatment (DOT) in Substance Use 
Disorder Treatment.

The Development of a Suicidal Ideation Predictive Model for Community-Dwelling 
Elderly Aged >55 Years.

Predicting opioid use disorder before and after the opioid prescribing peak in 
the United States: A machine learning tool using electronic healthcare records.

Older Adult Mild Cognitive Impairment Prediction from Multiscale Entropy EEG 
Patterns in Reminiscent Interior Image Working Memory Paradigm.

A Machine Learning Approach to Design an Efficient Selective Screening of Mild 
Cognitive Impairment.

Fully Automatic Speech-Based Analysis of the Semantic Verbal Fluency Task.

Epidemiological pathology of Aβ deposition in the ageing brain in CFAS: addition 
of multiple Aβ-derived measures does not improve dementia assessment using 
logistic regression and machine learning approaches.

A new strategy for the early detection of alzheimer disease stages using 
multifractal geometry analysis based on K-Nearest Neighbor algorithm.

ADscreen: A speech processing-based screening system for automatic 
identification of patients with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia.

Applying Automated MR-Based Diagnostic Methods to the Memory Clinic: A 
Prospective Study.

Predictors of Adolescents' First Episode of Homelessness Following Substance Use 
Treatment.

The Value of Handgrip Strength and Self-Rated Squat Ability in Predicting Mild 
Cognitive Impairment: Development and Validation of a Prediction Model.

Classification of elderly pain severity from automated video clip facial action 
unit analysis: A study from a Thai data repository.

[Keyword Network Analysis and Topic Modeling of News Articles Related to 
Artificial Intelligence and Nursing].

Identifying the suicidal ideation risk group among older adults in rural areas: 
Developing a predictive model using machine learning methods.

Pain Expressions in Dementia: Validity of Observers' Pain Judgments as a 
Function of Angle of Observation.

Episodix: a serious game to detect cognitive impairment in senior adults. A 
psychometric study.

Personalized prediction of antidepressant v. placebo response: evidence from the 
EMBARC study.

Language patterns in Japanese patients with Alzheimer disease: A machine 
learning approach.

Investigating the power of eyes open resting state EEG for assisting in dementia 
diagnosis.

ARTS: A novel In-vivo classifier of arteriolosclerosis for the older adult 
brain.

Heterogeneity in cognitive disability after a major disaster: A natural 
experiment study.

Cognitive Phenotypes of Older Adults with Subjective Cognitive Decline and 
Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment: The Czech Brain Aging Study.

Psychotropic Medication Use Is Associated With Greater 1-Year Incidence of 
Dementia After COVID-19 Hospitalization.

Improving predictive models for Alzheimer's disease using GWAS data by 
incorporating misclassified samples modeling.

The Effect of Individual Musculoskeletal Conditions on Depression: Updated 
Insights From an Irish Longitudinal Study on Aging.

Identifying treatment effects of an informal caregiver education intervention to 
increase days in the community and decrease caregiver distress: a 
machine-learning secondary analysis of subgroup effects in the HI-FIVES 
randomized clinical trial.

A robust brain signature region approach for episodic memory performance in 
older adults.

LC-MS/MS Insight into Vitamin C Restoration to Metabolic Disorder Evoked by 
Amyloid β in Caenorhabditis elegans CL2006.

Automatic detection of cognitive impairment in elderly people using an 
entertainment chatbot with Natural Language Processing capabilities.

Predictors of Patient Satisfaction Following Primary Total Knee Arthroplasty: 
Results from a Traditional Statistical Model and a Machine Learning Algorithm.

Detecting changes in help seeker conversations on a suicide prevention helpline 
during the COVID- 19 pandemic: in-depth analysis using encoder representations 
from transformers.

Deep transfer learning of structural magnetic resonance imaging fused with blood 
parameters improves brain age prediction.

Validation of the Salzburg Dementia Test Prediction (SDTP) as a Cognitive 
Screening Tool in an English-Speaking Inpatient Medical Setting.

Epidemiological trends in opioid-only and opioid/polysubstance-related death 
rates among American Indian/Alaska Native populations from 1999 to 2019: a 
retrospective longitudinal ecological study.

What Factors Are Most Closely Associated With Mood Disorders in Adolescents 
During the COVID-19 Pandemic? A Cross-Sectional Study Based on 1,771 Adolescents 
in Shandong Province, China.

Equity in AgeTech for Ageing Well in Technology-Driven Places: The Role of 
Social Determinants in Designing AI-based Assistive Technologies.

Characterizing subgroup performance of probabilistic phenotype algorithms within 
older adults: a case study for dementia, mild cognitive impairment, and 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Prediction of brain age suggests accelerated atrophy after traumatic brain 
injury.

Polypharmacy in an Elderly Population: Enhancing Medication Management Through 
the Use of Clinical Decision Support Software Platforms.

The Use of Data Mining Methods for the Prediction of Dementia: Evidence From the 
English Longitudinal Study of Aging.

Development of a simple screening tool for determining cognitive status in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Demonstration of automated non-adherence and service disengagement risk 
monitoring with active follow-up for severe mental illness.

Validation study of "Santé-Cerveau", a digital tool for early cognitive changes 
identification.

Sum of boxes of the clinical dementia rating scale highly predicts conversion or 
reversion in predementia stages.

Factors associated with fall risk of community-dwelling older people: A decision 
tree analysis.

Adult onset epilepsy is defined by phenotypic clusters with unique comorbidities 
and risks of death.

Validation of accuracy of SVM-based fall detection system using real-world fall 
and non-fall datasets.

Development and validation of coding algorithms to identify patients with 
incident lung cancer in United States healthcare claims data.

Feasibility of Using a Wearable Biosensor Device in Patients at Risk for 
Alzheimer's Disease Dementia.

Understanding secondary students' continuance intention to adopt AI-powered 
intelligent tutoring system for English learning.

A Night-Time Monitoring System (eNightLog) to Prevent Elderly Wandering in 
Hostels: A Three-Month Field Study.

Right hemispheric white matter hyperintensities improve the prediction of 
spatial neglect severity in acute stroke.

Development and internal validation of a predictive model of cognitive decline 
36 months following elective surgery.

Use of Speech Analyses within a Mobile Application for the Assessment of 
Cognitive Impairment in Elderly People.

Identifying socio-demographic and clinical characteristics associated with 
medication beliefs about aromatase inhibitors among postmenopausal women with 
breast cancer.

Predicting Short-Term Mortality in Older Patients Discharged from Acute 
Hospitalizations Lasting Less Than 24 Hours.

Examining protective and buffering associations between sociocultural factors 
and adverse childhood experiences among American Indian adults with type 2 
diabetes: a quantitative, community-based participatory research approach.

Predicting HCV Incidence in Latinos with High-Risk Substance Use: A Data Science 
Approach.

A Cocktail of Polyherbal Bioactive Compounds and Regular Mobility Training as 
Senolytic Approaches in Age-dependent Alzheimer's: the In Silico Analysis, 
Lifestyle Intervention in Old Age.

A decision-support framework for promoting independent living and ageing well.

Questionnaire-Based Survey during COVID-19 Vaccination on the Prevalence of 
Elderly's Migraine, Chronic Daily Headache, and Medication-Overuse Headache in 
One Japanese City-Itoigawa Hisui Study.

Exploring Older Adults' Beliefs About the Use of Intelligent Assistants for 
Consumer Health Information Management: A Participatory Design Study.

A Data Science Approach to Estimating the Frequency of Driving Cessation 
Associated Suicide in the US: Evidence From the National Violent Death Reporting 
System.

Increasing access to cognitive screening in the elderly: Applying natural 
language processing methods to speech collected over the telephone.

Development of a Prediction Model for Antibiotic-Resistant Urinary Tract 
Infections Using Integrated Electronic Health Records from Multiple Clinics in 
North-Central Florida.

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Indices of Cortical Excitability Enhance the 
Prediction of Response to Pharmacotherapy in Late-Life Depression.

Risk Factors and Predictive Modeling for Post-Acute Sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 
Infection: Findings from EHR Cohorts of the RECOVER Initiative.

Development and evaluation of a risk algorithm predicting alcohol dependence 
after early onset of regular alcohol use.

Pre-training and ensembling based Alzheimer's disease detection.

A Personal Health System for Self-Management of Congestive Heart Failure 
(HeartMan): Development, Technical Evaluation, and Proof-of-Concept Randomized 
Controlled Trial.

Differentiating Alzheimer's Disease from Dementia with Lewy Bodies Using a Deep 
Learning Technique Based on Structural Brain Connectivity.

Automated Analysis of Drawing Process to Estimate Global Cognition in Older 
Adults: Preliminary International Validation on the US and Japan Data Sets.

Dynamics of the "Cognitive" Brain Wave P3b at Rest for Alzheimer Dementia 
Prediction in Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Biomarkers and Risk Assessment of Alzheimer's Disease in Low- and Middle-Income 
Countries.

Lower Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex Functional Connectivity in Late-Life 
Depression With Suicidal Ideation.

Risk stratification models for predicting preventable hospitalization in 
commercially insured late middle-aged adults with depression.

Alzheimer resemblance atrophy index, BrainAGE, and normal pressure hydrocephalus 
score in the prediction of subtle cognitive decline: added value compared to 
existing MR imaging markers.

Using Speech Data From Interactions With a Voice Assistant to Predict the Risk 
of Future Accidents for Older Drivers: Prospective Cohort Study.

Association of comorbid-socioeconomic clusters with mortality in late onset 
epilepsy derived through unsupervised machine learning.

Downregulated transferrin receptor in the blood predicts recurrent MDD in the 
elderly cohort: A fuzzy forests approach.

Brain structure and phenotypic profile of superagers compared with age-matched 
older adults: a longitudinal analysis from the Vallecas Project.

Distributed functional connectivity predicts neuropsychological test performance 
among older adults.

Ensemble based on static classifier selection for automated diagnosis of Mild 
Cognitive Impairment.

Bioinformatics investigation on blood-based gene expressions of Alzheimer's 
disease revealed ORAI2 gene biomarker susceptibility: An explainable artificial 
intelligence-based approach.

Modeling Large Sparse Data for Feature Selection: Hospital Admission Predictions 
of the Dementia Patients Using Primary Care Electronic Health Records.

Screening over Speech in Unselected Populations for Clinical Trials in AD 
(PROSPECT-AD): Study Design and Protocol.

Automated profiling of spontaneous speech in primary progressive aphasia and 
behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia: An approach based on 
usage-frequency.

A comparison of resting state EEG and structural MRI for classifying Alzheimer's 
disease and mild cognitive impairment.

Automated Video Analysis of Handwashing Behavior as a Potential Marker of 
Cognitive Health in Older Adults.

Automatic speech analysis for the assessment of patients with predementia and 
Alzheimer's disease.

Data-driven decision making for the screening of cognitive impairment in primary 
care: a machine learning approach using data from the ELSA-Brasil study.

False Atrial Fibrillation Alerts from Smartwatches are Associated with Decreased 
Perceived Physical Well-being and Confidence in Chronic Symptoms Management.

Differentiating Patients at the Memory Clinic With Simple Reaction Time 
Variables: A Predictive Modeling Approach Using Support Vector Machines and 
Bayesian Optimization.

Reduction of Time on the Ground Related to Real-Time Video Detection of Falls in 
Memory Care Facilities: Observational Study.

Changes in glial cell phenotypes precede overt neurofibrillary tangle formation, 
correlate with markers of cortical cell damage, and predict cognitive status of 
individuals at Braak III-IV stages.

Using Conditional Inference Forests to Examine Predictive Ability for Future 
Falls and Syncope in Older Adults: Results from The Irish Longitudinal Study on 
Ageing.

Using home monitoring technology to study the effects of traumatic brain injury 
on older multimorbid adults: protocol for a feasibility study.

Assessing the contributions of modifiable risk factors to serious falls and 
fragility fractures among older persons living with HIV.

[The application scenarios study on the intervention of cognitive decline in 
elderly population using metaverse technology].

Developing a Predictive Model for Depressive Disorders Using Stacking Ensemble 
and Naive Bayesian Nomogram: Using Samples Representing South Korea.

Efficacy of a Web App for Cognitive Training (MeMo) Regarding Cognitive and 
Behavioral Performance in People With Neurocognitive Disorders: Randomized 
Controlled Trial.

A research proposal testing a new model of ambulation activity among long-term 
care residents with dementia/cognitive impairment: the study protocol of a 
prospective longitudinal natural history study.

WTD-PSD: Presentation of Novel Feature Extraction Method Based on Discrete 
Wavelet Transformation and Time-Dependent Power Spectrum Descriptors for 
Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease.

Multimorbidity states associated with higher mortality rates in organ 
dysfunction and sepsis: a data-driven analysis in critical care.

Spouse-Appraised Memory Functioning Predicts Memory Decline Better Than 
Subjective Memory Complaints in Community Dwelling Older Adults at Genetic Risk 
for Alzheimer's Disease.

Does the SORG Orthopaedic Research Group Hip Fracture Delirium Algorithm Perform 
Well on an Independent Intercontinental Cohort of Patients With Hip Fractures 
Who Are 60 Years or Older?

Barriers to methamphetamine treatment seeking in residential centers in 
Aguascalientes, Mexico.

