1
One of the key issues facing public healthcare is the global trend of an 
increasingly ageing society which continues to present policy makers and 
caregivers with formidable healthcare and socio-economic challenges. Ageing is 
the primary contributor to a broad spectrum of chronic disorders all associated 
with a lower quality of life in the elderly. In 2019, the Chinese population 
constituted 18 % of the world population, with 164.5 million Chinese citizens 
aged 65 and above (65+), and 26 million aged 80 or above (80+). China has become 
an ageing society, and as it continues to age it will continue to exacerbate the 
burden borne by current family and public healthcare systems. Major healthcare 
challenges involved with caring for the elderly in China include the management 
of chronic non-communicable diseases (CNCDs), physical frailty, 
neurodegenerative diseases, cardiovascular diseases, with emerging challenges 
such as providing sufficient dental care, combating the rising prevalence of 
sexually transmitted diseases among nursing home communities, providing support 
for increased incidences of immune diseases, and the growing necessity to 
provide palliative care for the elderly. At the governmental level, it is 
necessary to make long-term strategic plans to respond to the pressures of an 
ageing society, especially to establish a nationwide, affordable, annual health 
check system to facilitate early diagnosis and provide access to affordable 
treatments. China has begun work on several activities to address these issues 
including the recent completion of the of the Ten-year Health-Care Reform 
project, the implementation of the Healthy China 2030 Action Plan, and the 
opening of the National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders. There 
are also societal challenges, namely the shift from an extended family system in 
which the younger provide home care for their elderly family members, to the 
current trend in which young people are increasingly migrating towards major 
cities for work, increasing reliance on nursing homes to compensate, especially 
following the outcomes of the 'one child policy' and the 'empty-nest elderly' 
phenomenon. At the individual level, it is important to provide avenues for 
people to seek and improve their own knowledge of health and disease, to 
encourage them to seek medical check-ups to prevent/manage illness, and to find 
ways to promote modifiable health-related behaviors (social activity, exercise, 
healthy diets, reasonable diet supplements) to enable healthier, happier, 
longer, and more productive lives in the elderly. Finally, at the technological 
or treatment level, there is a focus on modern technologies to counteract the 
negative effects of ageing. Researchers are striving to produce drugs that can 
mimic the effects of 'exercising more, eating less', while other anti-ageing 
molecules from molecular gerontologists could help to improve 'healthspan' in 
the elderly. Machine learning, 'Big Data', and other novel technologies can also 
be used to monitor disease patterns at the population level and may be used to 
inform policy design in the future. Collectively, synergies across disciplines 
on policies, geriatric care, drug development, personal awareness, the use of 
big data, machine learning and personalized medicine will transform China into a 
country that enables the most for its elderly, maximizing and celebrating their 
longevity in the coming decades. This is the 2nd edition of the review paper 
1
BACKGROUND: Identifying cognitive impairment early enough could support timely 
intervention that may hinder or delay the trajectory of cognitive impairment, 
thus increasing the chances for successful cognitive aging.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to build a prediction model based on machine learning for 
cognitive impairment among Chinese community-dwelling elderly people with normal 
cognition.
METHODS: A prospective cohort of 6718 older people from the Chinese Longitudinal 
Healthy Longevity Survey (CLHLS) register, followed between 2008 and 2011, was 
used to develop and validate the prediction model. Participants were included if 
they were aged 60 years or above, were community-dwelling elderly people, and 
had a cognitive Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score ≥18. They were 
excluded if they were diagnosed with a severe disease (eg, cancer and dementia) 
or were living in institutions. Cognitive impairment was identified using the 
Chinese version of the MMSE. Several machine learning algorithms (random forest, 
XGBoost, naïve Bayes, and logistic regression) were used to assess the 3-year 
risk of developing cognitive impairment. Optimal cutoffs and adjusted parameters 
were explored in validation data, and the model was further evaluated in test 
data. A nomogram was established to vividly present the prediction model.
RESULTS: The mean age of the participants was 80.4 years (SD 10.3 years), and 
50.85% (3416/6718) were female. During a 3-year follow-up, 991 (14.8%) 
participants were identified with cognitive impairment. Among 45 features, the 
following four features were finally selected to develop the model: age, 
instrumental activities of daily living, marital status, and baseline cognitive 
function. The concordance index of the model constructed by logistic regression 
was 0.814 (95% CI 0.781-0.846). Older people with normal cognitive functioning 
having a nomogram score of less than 170 were considered to have a low 3-year 
risk of cognitive impairment, and those with a score of 170 or greater were 
considered to have a high 3-year risk of cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: This simple and feasible cognitive impairment prediction model 
could identify community-dwelling elderly people at the greatest 3-year risk for 
cognitive impairment, which could help community nurses in the early 
identification of dementia.
2
Cognitive decline is a gradual neurodegenerative process that is affected by 
genetic and environmental factors. The doctor-patient relationship in the 
healthcare for cognitive decline is in a "shallow" medical world. With the 
development of data science, virtual reality, artificial intelligence, and 
digital twin, the introduction of the concept of the metaverse in medicine has 
brought alternative and complementary strategies in the intervention of 
cognitive decline. This article technically analyzes the application scenarios 
and paradigms of the metaverse in medicine in the field of mental health, such 
as hospital management, diagnosis, prediction, prevention, rehabilitation, 
progression delay, assisting life, companionship, and supervision. The metaverse 
in medicine has made primary progress in education, immersive consultation, 
dental disease, and Parkinson's disease, bringing revolutionary prospects for 
non-pharmacological complementary treatment of cognitive decline and other 
mental problems. In particular, with the demand for non-face-to-face 
communication generated by the global COVID-19 epidemic, the needs for 
uncontactable healthcare service for the elderly have increased. The paradigm of 
self-monitoring, self-healing, and healthcare experienced by the elderly through 
the metaverse in medicine, especially from meta-platform, meta-community, and 
meta-hospital, will be generated, which will reconstruct the service modes for 
the elderly people. The future map of the metaverse in medicine is huge, which 
depends on the co-construction of community partners.
3
Prolonging survival in good health is a fundamental societal goal. However, the 
leading determinants of disability-free survival in healthy older people have 
not been well established. Data from ASPREE, a bi-national placebo-controlled 
trial of aspirin with 4.7 years median follow-up, was analysed. At enrolment, 
participants were healthy and without prior cardiovascular events, dementia or 
persistent physical disability. Disability-free survival outcome was defined as 
absence of dementia, persistent disability or death. Selection of potential 
predictors from amongst 25 biomedical, psychosocial and lifestyle variables 
including recognized geriatric risk factors, utilizing a machine-learning 
approach. Separate models were developed for men and women. The selected 
predictors were evaluated in a multivariable Cox proportional hazards model and 
validated internally by bootstrapping. We included 19,114 Australian and US 
participants aged ≥65 years (median 74 years, IQR 71.6-77.7). Common predictors 
of a worse prognosis in both sexes included higher age, lower Modified 
Mini-Mental State Examination score, lower gait speed, lower grip strength and 
abnormal (low or elevated) body mass index. Additional risk factors for men 
included current smoking, and abnormal eGFR. In women, diabetes and depression 
were additional predictors. The biased-corrected areas under the receiver 
operating characteristic curves for the final prognostic models at 5 years were 
0.72 for men and 0.75 for women. Final models showed good calibration between 
the observed and predicted risks. We developed a prediction model in which age, 
cognitive function and gait speed were the strongest predictors of 
disability-free survival in healthy older people.Trial registration 
Clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01038583).
4
BACKGROUND: Early detection of potential depression among elderly people is 
conducive for timely preventive intervention and clinical care to improve 
quality of life. Therefore, depression prediction considering sequential 
progression patterns in elderly needs to be further explored.
METHODS: We selected 1,538 elderly people from Chinese Longitudinal Healthy 
Longevity Study (CLHLS) wave 3-7 survey. Long short-term memory (LSTM) and six 
machine learning (ML) models were used to predict different depression risk 
factors and the depression risks in the elderly population in the next two 
years. Receiver operating curve (ROC) and decision curve analysis (DCA) were 
used to evaluate the prediction accuracy of the reference model and ML models.
RESULTS: The area under the ROC curve (AUC) values of logistic regression with 
lasso regularisation (AUC=0.629, p-value=0.020) was the highest among ML models. 
DCA results showed that the net benefit of six ML models was similar (threshold: 
0.00-0.10), the net benefit of lasso regression was the largest (threshold: 
0.10-0.17 and 0.22-0.25), and the net benefit of DNN was the largest (threshold: 
0.17-0.22 and 0.25-0.40). In two ML models, activities of daily living (ADL)/ 
instrumental ADL (IADL), self-rated health, marital status, arthritis, and 
number of cohabiting were the most important predictors for elderly with 
depression.
LIMITATIONS: The retrospective waves used in the LSTM model need to be further 
increased.
CONCLUSION: The decision support system based on the proposed LSTM+ML model may 
be very valuable for doctors, nurses and community medical providers for early 
diagnosis and intervention.
5
INTRODUCTION: To test the utility of the "A/T/N" system in the Chinese 
population, we study core Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers in a newly 
established Chinese cohort.
METHODS: A total of 411 participants were selected, including 96 cognitively 
normal individuals, 94 patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients, 
173 patients with AD, and 48 patients with non-AD dementia. Fluid biomarkers 
were measured with single molecule array. Amyloid beta (Aβ) deposition was 
determined by 18 F-Flobetapir positron emission tomography (PET), and brain 
atrophy was quantified using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
RESULTS: Aβ42/Aβ40 was decreased, whereas levels of phosphorylated tau (p-tau) 
were increased in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma from patients with AD. 
CSF Aβ42/Aβ40, CSF p-tau, and plasma p-tau showed a high concordance in 
discriminating between AD and non-AD dementia or elderly controls. A combination 
of plasma p-tau, apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype, and MRI measures accurately 
predicted amyloid PET status.
DISCUSSION: These results revealed a universal applicability of the "A/T/N" 
framework in a Chinese population and established an optimal diagnostic model 
consisting of cost-effective and non-invasive approaches for diagnosing AD.
6
Preserving cognition and mental capacity is critical to aging with autonomy. 
Early detection of pathological cognitive decline facilitates the greatest 
impact of restorative or preventative treatments. Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
in healthcare is the use of computational algorithms that mimic human cognitive 
functions to analyze complex medical data. AI technologies like machine learning 
(ML) support the integration of biological, psychological, and social factors 
when approaching diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of disease. This paper 
serves to acquaint clinicians and other stakeholders with the use, benefits, and 
limitations of AI for predicting, diagnosing, and classifying mild and major 
neurocognitive impairments, by providing a conceptual overview of this topic 
with emphasis on the features explored and AI techniques employed. We present 
studies that fell into six categories of features used for these purposes: (1) 
sociodemographics; (2) clinical and psychometric assessments; (3) neuroimaging 
and neurophysiology; (4) electronic health records and claims; (5) novel 
assessments (e.g., sensors for digital data); and (6) genomics/other omics. For 
each category we provide examples of AI approaches, including supervised and 
unsupervised ML, deep learning, and natural language processing. AI technology, 
still nascent in healthcare, has great potential to transform the way we 
diagnose and treat patients with neurocognitive disorders.
7
Using AI for dementia diagnosis is still in research stage, however some of the 
work points to the development of new medical devices. One is a voxel-based 
morphometry analysis of brain atrophy, and a brain network analysis using a 
resting state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging. The other is an 
application to detect dementia in daily life using "IoT" technology. As it has 
been determined that elderly people's dementia is closely related to lifestyle, 
the use of AI in the diagnosis is to predict the possibility of dementia in the 
preclinical stage and to link it to prevention, rather than to provide a 
definitive diagnosis.
8
BACKGROUND: Early identification of Alzheimer's disease or mild cognitive 
impairment can help guide direct prevention and supportive treatments, improve 
outcomes, and reduce medical costs. Existing advanced diagnostic tools are 
mostly based on neuroimaging and suffer from certain problems in cost, 
reliability, repeatability, accessibility, ease of use, and clinical 
integration. To address these problems, we developed, evaluated, and implemented 
an early diagnostic tool using machine learning and non-imaging factors.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 654 participants aged 65 or older from the 
Nursing Home in Hangzhou, China were identified. Information collected from 
these patients includes dementia status and 70 demographic, cognitive, 
socioeconomic, and clinical features. Logistic regression, support vector 
machine (SVM), neural network, random forest, extreme gradient boosting 
(XGBoost), least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), and best 
subset models were trained, tuned, and internally validated using a novel double 
cross validation algorithm and multiple evaluation metrics. The trained models 
were also compared and externally validated using a separate dataset with 1,100 
participants from four communities in Zhejiang Province, China. The model with 
the best performance was then identified and implemented online with a friendly 
user interface. For the nursing dataset, the top three models are the neural 
network (AUROC = 0.9435), XGBoost (AUROC = 0.9398), and SVM with the polynomial 
kernel (AUROC = 0.9213). With the community dataset, the best three models are 
the random forest (AUROC = 0.9259), SVM with linear kernel (AUROC = 0.9282), and 
SVM with polynomial kernel (AUROC = 0.9213). The F1 scores and area under the 
precision-recall curve showed that the SVMs, neural network, and random forest 
were robust on the unbalanced community dataset. Overall the SVM with the 
polynomial kernel was found to be the best model. The LASSO and best subset 
models identified 17 features most relevant to dementia prediction, mostly from 
cognitive test results and socioeconomic characteristics.
CONCLUSION: Our non-imaging-based diagnostic tool can effectively predict 
dementia outcomes. The tool can be conveniently incorporated into clinical 
practice. Its online implementation allows zero barriers to its use, which 
enhances the disease's diagnosis, improves the quality of care, and reduces 
costs.
9
Predictive models in neuroimaging are increasingly designed with the intent to 
improve risk stratification and support interventional efforts in psychiatry. 
Many of these models have been developed in samples of children school-aged or 
older. Nevertheless, despite growing evidence that altered brain maturation 
during the fetal, infant, and toddler (FIT) period modulates risk for poor 
mental health outcomes in childhood, these models are rarely implemented in FIT 
samples. Applications of predictive modeling in children of these ages provide 
an opportunity to develop powerful tools for improved characterization of the 
neural mechanisms underlying development. To facilitate the broader use of 
predictive models in FIT neuroimaging, we present a brief primer and systematic 
review on the methods used in current predictive modeling FIT studies. 
Reflecting on current practices in more than 100 studies conducted over the past 
decade, we provide an overview of topics, modalities, and methods commonly used 
in the field and under-researched areas. We then outline ethical and future 
considerations for neuroimaging researchers interested in predicting health 
outcomes in early life, including researchers who may be relatively new to 
either advanced machine learning methods or using FIT data. Altogether, the last 
decade of FIT research in machine learning has provided a foundation for 
accelerating the prediction of early-life trajectories across the full spectrum 
of illness and health.
10
Dementia is one of the most prevalent health problems in the aging population. 
Despite the significant number of people affected, dementia diagnoses are often 
significantly delayed, missing opportunities to maximize life quality. Early 
identification of older adults at high risk for dementia may help to maximize 
current quality of life and to improve planning for future health needs in 
dementia patients. However, most existing risk prediction models predominantly 
use static variables, not considering temporal patterns of health status. This 
study used an attention-based time-aware model to predict incident dementia that 
incorporated longitudinal temporal health conditions. The predictive performance 
of the time-aware model was compared with three traditional models using static 
variables and demonstrated higher predictive power.
11
Loneliness and social isolation are subjective measures associated with the 
feeling of discomfort and distress. Various factors associated with the feeling 
of loneliness or social isolation are: the built environment, long-term 
illnesses, the presence of disabilities or health problems, etc. One of the most 
important aspect which could impact feelings of loneliness is mobility. In this 
paper, we present a machine-learning based approach to classify the user 
loneliness levels using their indoor and outdoor mobility patterns. User 
mobility data has been collected based on indoor and outdoor sensors carried on 
by volunteers frequenting an elderly nursing house in Tampere region, Finland. 
The data was collected using Pozyx sensor for indoor data and Pico minifinder 
sensor for outdoor data. Mobility patterns such as the distance traveled indoors 
and outdoors, indoor and outdoor estimated speed, and frequently visited 
clusters were the most relevant features for classifying the user's perceived 
loneliness levels.Three types of data used for classification task were indoor 
data, outdoor data and combined indoor-outdoor data. Indoor data consisted of 
indoor mobility data and statistical features from accelerometer data, outdoor 
data consisted of outdoor mobility data and other parameters such as speed 
recorded from sensors and course of a person whereas combined indoor-outdoor 
data had common mobility features from both indoor and outdoor data. We found 
that the machine-learning model based on XGBoost algorithm achieved the highest 
performance with accuracy between 90% and 98% for indoor, outdoor, and combined 
indoor-outdoor data. We also found that Lubben-scale based labelling of 
perceived loneliness works better for both indoor and outdoor data, whereas UCLA 
scale-based labelling works better with combined indoor-outdoor data.
12
This chapter reviews how recording and analysis of eye movements have been 
applied to understanding cognitive functioning in patients with neurological 
disease. Measures derived from the performance of instructed eye movement tests 
such as the anti-saccade and memory-guided saccade tasks have been shown to be 
associated with cognitive test performance and the early stages of 
neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. Other 
researchers have taken an ecological approach and recorded the uninstructed 
pattern of saccades made by patients during performance of established 
neuropsychological tasks. Studies that have analysed the eye movement strategies 
used in a number of widely used tests are reviewed, including the Corsi blocks, 
Tower of London, 'CANTAB' Spatial Working Memory and Brixton Spatial 
Anticipation test. The findings illustrate that eye movements are not purely in 
the service of vision, but support visuospatial working memory and forward 
action planning. Eye movement tests and measures also have potential for 
application in the assessment and diagnosis of neurological disease and 
cognitive impairment. Establishing large-scale normative data sets in healthy 
older adults and use of machine learning multivariate classifier algorithms may 
be key to further developing eye tracking applications in neuropsychological 
assessment.
13
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus is a clinical syndrome that mainly targets the 
elderly population. It features dementia, impaired walking, and the malfunction 
of sphincters. The rapid identification and large-scale screening of patients 
with normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) are of great significance as surgical 
interventions can greatly improve or even reverse the symptoms. This review aims 
to summarize the traditional parameters used to diagnose NPH and the emerging 
progression in neuroimaging of the disease, hoping to provide an up-to-date 
overall perspective and summarize the possible direction of its future 
development.
14
Although the diagnosis and treatment of depression is a medical field, ICTs and 
AI technologies are used widely to detect depression earlier in the elderly. 
These technologies are used to identify behavioral changes in the physical world 
or sentiment changes in cyberspace, known as symptoms of depression. However, 
although sentiment and physical changes, which are signs of depression in the 
elderly, are usually revealed simultaneously, there is no research on them at 
the same time. To solve the problem, this paper proposes knowledge graph-based 
cyber-physical view (CPV)-based activity pattern recognition for the early 
detection of depression, also known as KARE. In the KARE framework, the 
knowledge graph (KG) plays key roles in providing cross-domain knowledge as well 
as resolving issues of grammatical and semantic heterogeneity required in order 
to integrate cyberspace and the physical world. In addition, it can flexibly 
express the patterns of different activities for each elderly. To achieve this, 
the KARE framework implements a set of new machine learning techniques. The 
first is 1D-CNN for attribute representation in relation to learning to connect 
the attributes of physical and cyber worlds and the KG. The second is the entity 
alignment with embedding vectors extracted by the CNN and GNN. The third is a 
graph extraction method to construct the CPV from KG with the graph 
representation learning and wrapper-based feature selection in the unsupervised 
manner. The last one is a method of activity-pattern graph representation based 
on a Gaussian Mixture Model and KL divergence for training the GAT model to 
detect depression early. To demonstrate the superiority of the KARE framework, 
we performed the experiments using real-world datasets with five 
state-of-the-art models in knowledge graph entity alignment.
15
Dementia is one of the major health challenges in aging populations, with 50 
million people diagnosed worldwide. However, dementia is often underdiagnosed or 
delayed resulting in missed opportunities for appropriate care plans. 
Identifying early signs of dementia is essential for better life quality of 
aging populations. Monitoring early signs of individual health changes could 
help clinicians diagnose dementia in its early stages with more effective 
treatment plans. However, rare data for dementia cases compared to the normal 
(i.e., imbalance class distribution) make it challenging to develop robust 
supervised learning models. In order to alleviate this issue, we investigated 
one-class classification (OCC) techniques, which use only majority class (i.e., 
normal cases) in model development to detect dementia signals from older adult 
clinical visits. The OCC models identify abnormality of older adults' 
longitudinal health conditions to predict incident dementia. The predictive 
performance of the OCC was compared with a recent streaming clustering-based 
technique and demonstrated higher predictive power. Our analysis showed that OCC 
has a promising potential to increase power in predicting dementia.
16
Background: Recent evidence suggests that integration of multi-modal data 
improves performance in machine learning prediction of depression treatment 
outcomes. Here, we compared the predictive performance of three machine learning 
classifiers using differing combinations of sociodemographic characteristics, 
baseline clinical self-reports, cognitive tests, and structural magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) features to predict treatment outcomes in late-life 
depression (LLD). Methods: Data were combined from two clinical trials conducted 
with depressed adults aged 60 and older, including response to escitalopram (N = 
32, NCT01902004) and Tai Chi (N = 35, NCT02460666). Remission was defined as a 
score of 6 or less on the 24-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAMD) at 
the end of 24 weeks of treatment. Features subsets were constructed from 
baseline sociodemographic and clinical features, gray matter volumes (GMVs), or 
both. Three classification algorithms were compared: (1) Support Vector 
Machine-Radial Bias Function (SVMRBF), (2) Random Forest (RF), and (3) Logistic 
Regression (LR). A repeated 5-fold cross-validation approach with a 
wrapper-based feature selection method was used for model fitting. Model 
performance metrics included Area under the ROC Curve (AUC) and Matthews 
correlation coefficient (MCC). Cross-validated performance significance was 
tested by permutation analysis. Classifiers were compared by Cochran's Q and 
post-hoc pairwise comparisons using McNemar's Chi-Square test with Bonferroni 
correction. Results: For the RF and SVMRBF algorithms, the combined feature set 
outperformed the clinical and GMV feature sets with a final cross-validated AUC 
of 0.83 ± 0.11 and 0.80 ± 0.11, respectively. Both classifiers passed 
permutation analysis. The LR algorithm performed best using GMV features alone 
(AUC 0.79 ± 0.14) but failed to pass permutation analysis using any feature set. 
Performance of the three classifiers differed significantly for all three 
features sets. Important predictive features of treatment response included 
anterior and posterior cingulate volumes, depression characteristics, and 
self-reported health-related quality scores. Conclusion: This preliminary 
exploration into the use of ML and multi-modal data to identify predictors of 
general treatment response in LLD indicates that integration of clinical and 
structural MRI features significantly increases predictive capability. 
Identified features are among those previously implicated in geriatric 
depression, encouraging future work in this arena.
17
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia in older adults. There 
is currently a lot of interest in applying machine learning to find out 
metabolic diseases like Alzheimer's and Diabetes that affect a large population 
of people around the world. Their incidence rates are increasing at an alarming 
rate every year. In Alzheimer's disease, the brain is affected by 
neurodegenerative changes. As our aging population increases, more and more 
individuals, their families, and healthcare will experience diseases that affect 
memory and functioning. These effects will be profound on the social, financial, 
and economic fronts. In its early stages, Alzheimer's disease is hard to 
predict. A treatment given at an early stage of AD is more effective, and it 
causes fewer minor damage than a treatment done at a later stage. Several 
techniques such as Decision Tree, Random Forest, Support Vector Machine, 
Gradient Boosting, and Voting classifiers have been employed to identify the 
best parameters for Alzheimer's disease prediction. Predictions of Alzheimer's 
disease are based on Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS) data, and 
performance is measured with parameters like Precision, Recall, Accuracy, and 
F1-score for ML models. The proposed classification scheme can be used by 
clinicians to make diagnoses of these diseases. It is highly beneficial to lower 
annual mortality rates of Alzheimer's disease in early diagnosis with these ML 
algorithms. The proposed work shows better results with the best validation 
average accuracy of 83% on the test data of AD. This test accuracy score is 
significantly higher in comparison with existing works.
18
BACKGROUND: Poor functional status is a key marker of morbidity, yet is not 
routinely captured in clinical encounters. We developed and evaluated the 
accuracy of a machine learning algorithm that leveraged electronic health record 
(EHR) data to provide a scalable process for identification of functional 
impairment.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients with an electronically captured 
screening measure of functional status (Older Americans Resources and Services 
ADL/IADL) between 2018 and 2020 (N = 6484). Patients were classified using 
unsupervised learning K means and t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding 
into normal function (NF), mild to moderate functional impairment (MFI), and 
severe functional impairment (SFI) states. Using 11 EHR clinical variable 
domains (832 variable input features), we trained an Extreme Gradient Boosting 
supervised machine learning algorithm to distinguish functional status states, 
and measured prediction accuracies. Data were randomly split into training (80%) 
and test (20%) sets. The SHapley Additive Explanations (SHAP) feature importance 
analysis was used to list the EHR features in rank order of their contribution 
to the outcome.
RESULTS: Median age was 75.3 years, 62% female, 60% White. Patients were 
classified as 53% NF (n = 3453), 30% MFI (n = 1947), and 17% SFI (n = 1084). 
Summary of model performance for identifying functional status state (NF, MFI, 
SFI) was AUROC (area under the receiving operating characteristic curve) 0.92, 
0.89, and 0.87, respectively. Age, falls, hospitalization, home health use, labs 
(e.g., albumin), comorbidities (e.g., dementia, heart failure, chronic kidney 
disease, chronic pain), and social determinants of health (e.g., alcohol use) 
were highly ranked features in predicting functional status states.
CONCLUSION: A machine learning algorithm run on EHR clinical data has potential 
utility for differentiating functional status in the clinical setting. Through 
further validation and refinement, such algorithms can complement traditional 
screening methods and result in a population-based strategy for identifying 
patients with poor functional status who need additional health resources.
19
Erratum in
20
P001 - Sepsis impairs the capillary response within hypoxic capillaries and 
21
BACKGROUND: Efforts to identify important risk factors for cognitive impairment 
and dementia have to date mostly relied on meta-analytic strategies. A 
comprehensive empirical evaluation of these risk factors within a single study 
is currently lacking.
OBJECTIVE: We used a combined methodology of machine learning and 
semi-parametric survival analysis to estimate the relative importance of 52 
predictors in forecasting cognitive impairment and dementia in a large, 
population-representative sample of older adults.
METHODS: Participants from the Health and Retirement Study (N = 9,979; aged 
50-98 years) were followed for up to 10 years (M = 6.85 for cognitive 
impairment; M = 7.67 for dementia). Using a split-sample methodology, we first 
estimated the relative importance of predictors using machine learning (random 
forest survival analysis), and we then used semi-parametric survival analysis 
(Cox proportional hazards) to estimate effect sizes for the most important 
variables.
RESULTS: African Americans and individuals who scored high on emotional distress 
were at relatively highest risk for developing cognitive impairment and 
dementia. Sociodemographic (lower education, Hispanic ethnicity) and health 
variables (worse subjective health, increasing BMI) were comparatively strong 
predictors for cognitive impairment. Cardiovascular factors (e.g., smoking, 
physical inactivity) and polygenic scores (with and without APOEɛ4) appeared 
less important than expected. Post-hoc sensitivity analyses underscored the 
robustness of these results.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher-order factors (e.g., emotional distress, subjective health), 
which reflect complex interactions between various aspects of an individual, 
were more important than narrowly defined factors (e.g., clinical and behavioral 
indicators) when evaluated concurrently to predict cognitive impairment and 
dementia.
22
The use of radiomics and artificial intelligence applied for the diagnosis and 
monitoring of Alzheimer's disease has developed in recent years. However, this 
approach is not yet completely applicable in clinical practice. The aim of this 
paper is to provide a systematic analysis of the studies that have included the 
use of radiomics from different imaging techniques and artificial intelligence 
for the diagnosis and monitoring of Alzheimer's disease in order to improve the 
clinical outcomes and quality of life of older patients. A systematic review of 
the literature was conducted in February 2023, analyzing manuscripts and 
articles of the last 5 years from the PubMed, Scopus and Embase databases. All 
studies concerning discrimination among Alzheimer's disease, Mild Cognitive 
Impairment and healthy older people performing radiomics analysis through 
machine and deep learning were included. A total of 15 papers were included. The 
results showed a very good performance of this approach in the differentiating 
Alzheimer's disease patients-both at the dementia and pre-dementia phases of the 
disease-from healthy older people. In summary, radiomics and AI can be valuable 
tools for diagnosing and monitoring the progression of Alzheimer's disease, 
potentially leading to earlier and more accurate diagnosis and treatment. 
However, the results reported by this review should be read with great caution, 
keeping in mind that imaging alone is not enough to identify dementia due to 
Alzheimer's.
23
Under-diagnosis of depression and anxiety is common in older adults. This 
project took a mixed methods approach to explore the application of machine 
learning and technology for early detection of these conditions. Mood measures 
collected with digital technologies were used to predict depression and anxiety 
status according to the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) and the Hospital 
Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). Interactive group activities and interviews 
were used to explore views of older adults and healthcare professionals on this 
approach respectively. The results show good potential for using a machine 
learning approach with mood data to predict later depression, though prospective 
results are preliminary. Qualitative findings highlight motivators and barriers 
to use of mental health technologies, as well as usability issues. If 
consideration is given to these issues, this approach could allow alerts to be 
provided to healthcare staff to draw attention to service users who may go on to 
experience depression.
24
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Many artificial intelligence tools are currently being 
developed to assist diagnosis of dementia from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
However, these tools have so far been difficult to integrate in the clinical 
routine workflow. In this work, we propose a new simple way to use them and 
assess their utility for improving diagnostic accuracy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied 34 patients with early-onset Alzheimer's 
disease (EOAD), 49 with late-onset AD (LOAD), 39 with frontotemporal dementia 
(FTD) and 24 with depression from the pre-existing cohort CLIN-AD. Support 
vector machine (SVM) automatic classifiers using 3D T1 MRI were trained to 
distinguish: LOAD vs. Depression, FTD vs. LOAD, EOAD vs. Depression, EOAD vs. 
FTD. We extracted SVM weight maps, which are tridimensional representations of 
discriminant atrophy patterns used by the classifier to take its decisions and 
we printed posters of these maps. Four radiologists (2 senior neuroradiologists 
and 2 unspecialized junior radiologists) performed a visual classification of 
the 4 diagnostic pairs using 3D T1 MRI. Classifications were performed twice: 
first with standard radiological reading and then using SVM weight maps as a 
guide.
RESULTS: Diagnostic performance was significantly improved by the use of the 
weight maps for the two junior radiologists in the case of FTD vs. EOAD. 
Improvement was over 10 points of diagnostic accuracy.
CONCLUSION: This tool can improve the diagnostic accuracy of junior radiologists 
and could be integrated in the clinical routine workflow.
25
INTRODUCTION: Dementia is a progressive disorder associated with age, which is 
characterized by deterioration of individuals' cognitive functions such as the 
ability to perform routine tasks. With the increase of human life expectancy, 
the prevalence of dementia patients will reach 152 million in 2050. 
Unfortunately, there is no treatment available to cure dementia or alter the 
course of its progression. However, there is an area of support for patients and 
caregivers to assist daily living. Technological devices and applications are 
increasingly advancing, exploiting sensory data for dementia patients and 
homecare using smartphones to permit monitoring of their activities.
AIM: This paper uses the labeled dataset besides comparing the 3-classification 
algorithm to evaluate whether or not the algorithms deployed can classify the 
activities with high accuracy.
RESULTS: A public data is used to classify human activities into one of the six 
activities, BigML platform is used to build machine learning models. Results 
show that machine learning algorithms can achieve high accuracy. The activity 
recognition algorithms are highly accurate using ridged regression and deep 
neural networks, with almost all activities being recognized correctly over 98% 
of the time.
CONCLUSION: An application of smartphones can be utilized for human activities 
monitoring by proposing a high level for dementia patients and homecare 
monitoring services. Using this service, the patients only need to carry the 
smartphone, and their caregivers simply need to use the application that 
monitors their patients' activities.
26
BACKGROUND: Clinical markers of cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease (PD) 
encompass several mental non-motor symptoms such as hallucinations, apathy, 
anxiety, and depression. Furthermore, freezing of gait (FOG) and specific gait 
alterations have been associated with cognitive dysfunction in PD. Finally, 
although low cerebrospinal fluid levels of amyloid-β42 have been found to 
predict cognitive decline in PD, hitherto PET imaging of amyloid-β (Aβ) failed 
to consistently demonstrate the association between Aβ plaques deposition and 
mild cognitive impairment in PD (PD-MCI).
AIM: Finding significant features associated with PD-MCI through a machine 
learning approach.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were assessed with an extensive clinical and 
neuropsychological examination. Clinical evaluation included the assessment of 
mental non-motor symptoms and FOG using the specific items of the MDS-UPDRS I 
and II. Based on the neuropsychological examination, patients were classified as 
subjects without and with MCI (noPD-MCI, PD-MCI). All patients were evaluated 
using a motion analysis system. A subgroup of PD patients also underwent amyloid 
PET imaging. PD-MCI and noPD-MCI subjects were compared with a univariate 
statistical analysis on demographic data, clinical features, gait analysis 
variables, and amyloid PET data. Then, machine learning analysis was performed 
two times: Model 1 was implemented with age, clinical variables 
(hallucinations/psychosis, depression, anxiety, apathy, sleep problems, FOG), 
and gait features, while Model 2, including only the subgroup performing PET, 
was implemented with PET variables combined with the top five features of the 
former model.
RESULTS: Seventy-five PD patients were enrolled (33 PD-MCI and 42 noPD-MCI). 
PD-MCI vs. noPD-MCI resulted in older and showed worse gait patterns, mainly 
characterized by increased dynamic instability and reduced step length; when 
comparing amyloid PET data, the two groups did not differ. Regarding the machine 
learning analyses, evaluation metrics were satisfactory for Model 1 overcoming 
80% for accuracy and specificity, whereas they were disappointing for Model 2.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that machine learning implemented with 
specific clinical features and gait variables exhibits high accuracy in 
predicting PD-MCI, whereas amyloid PET imaging is not able to increase 
prediction. Additionally, our results prompt that a data mining approach on 
certain gait parameters might represent a reliable surrogate biomarker of 
PD-MCI.
27
OBJECTIVE: The purpose is to understand the depression status of the elderly in 
the community, explore its influencing factors, formulate a comprehensive 
psychological intervention plan according to the influencing factors, implement 
demonstration psychological intervention, and evaluate and feedback the effect, 
so as to provide a reference for improving the mental health of the elderly.
METHOD: In order to make the output of different emotional data in LSTM more 
discriminative, a method to dynamically filter the output of LSTM is proposed. 
Combining the methods of Attention-LSTM, time-dimensional AI attention, and 
feature-dimensional AI attention, the best model in this paper is obtained. The 
multistage stratified cluster sampling method was used to conduct a 
questionnaire survey on the elderly aged 60 and above in a certain area, 
including the general demographic characteristics questionnaire of the elderly, 
the self-rating scale of mental health symptoms, and the health self-management 
ability of adults. All data were entered into a database using Excel software, 
and SPSS 19.0 statistical software was used for statistical analysis. 
Results/Discussion. The detection rate of depression (GDS ≥ 11 points) among the 
elderly in a community in a certain area was 39.38%. Multivariate logistic 
regression analysis showed that family history of mental illness, more negative 
life events, decreased ability of daily living, living alone, and suffering from 
physical diseases in the past six months were the risk factors for depression in 
the elderly. Community health education can partially alleviate depression in 
the elderly. The detection rate and degree of depression of the elderly in the 
comprehensive psychological intervention group were significantly lower than 
those in the control group, and the difference was statistically significant (P 
< 0.05).
28
Objective: To determine whether predictions of suicide risk from machine 
learning models identify unexpected patients or patients without medical record 
documentation of traditional risk factors. Methods: The study sample included 
27,091,382 outpatient mental health (MH) specialty or general medical visits 
with a MH diagnosis for patients aged 11 years or older from January 1, 2009, to 
September 30, 2017. We used predicted risk scores of suicide attempt and suicide 
death, separately, within 90 days of visits to classify visits into risk score 
percentile strata. For each stratum, we calculated counts and percentages of 
visits with traditional risk factors, including prior self-harm diagnoses and 
emergency department visits or hospitalizations with MH diagnoses, in the last 
3, 12, and 60 months. Results: Risk-factor percentages increased with predicted 
risk scores. Among MH specialty visits, 66%, 88%, and 99% of visits with suicide 
attempt risk scores in the top 3 strata (respectively, 90th-95th, 95th-98th, 
and ≥ 98th percentiles) and 60%, 77%, and 93% of visits with suicide risk scores 
in the top 3 strata represented patients who had at least one traditional risk 
factor documented in the prior 12 months. Among general medical visits, 52%, 
66%, and 90% of visits with suicide attempt risk scores in the top 3 strata and 
45%, 66%, and 79% of visits with suicide risk scores in the top 3 strata 
represented patients who had a history of traditional risk factors in the last 
12 months. Conclusions: Suicide risk alerts based on these machine learning 
models coincide with patients traditionally thought of as high-risk at their 
high-risk visits.
29
BACKGROUND: Diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease (CVD) are 
modifiable lifestyle-related cardiometabolic conditions associated with 
dementia. Yet, little is known regarding these associations among American 
Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) people. Thus, we examined the association of 
diabetes, hypertension, and CVD with all-cause dementia among AI/ANs aged 65 
years and older.
METHOD: This was a cross-sectional analysis of the Indian Health Service 
Improving Health Care Delivery Data Project. Our study population was a 1:1 
matched sample of 4 074 AI/ANs aged 65 years and older and Indian Health Service 
active users during fiscal year 2013. We employed International Classification 
of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification diagnostic codes for 
all-cause dementia, hypertension, and CVD. Diabetes was measured with a 
validated algorithm to identify adults with diabetes that uses diagnoses, 
laboratory test results, and medication criteria.
RESULTS: Multivariable analyses revealed that diabetes and CVD were associated 
with increased odds of all-cause dementia and hypertension was not. 
Cardiovascular disease types associated with all-cause dementia differed with 
cerebrovascular disease having the strongest association. Analyses stratified by 
gender revealed that diabetes and CVD were associated with increased odds of 
all-cause dementia for women and only CVD was associated with all-cause dementia 
for men.
CONCLUSIONS: Training and support of primary care clinicians, addressing 
cultural considerations, and ensuring inclusion of AI/ANs in research are steps 
that could help meet AI/AN people's needs. Our findings underscore to the 
importance of improved management and control of diabetes and CVD, which may 
lead to the prevention of dementia among older AI/ANs.
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
30
INTRODUCTION: Early differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is important, but it remains challenging. 
Different profiles of speech and language impairments between AD and DLB have 
been suggested, but direct comparisons have not been investigated.
METHODS: We collected speech responses from 121 older adults comprising AD, DLB, 
and cognitively normal (CN) groups and investigated their acoustic, prosodic, 
and linguistic features.
RESULTS: The AD group showed larger differences from the CN group than the DLB 
group in linguistic features, while the DLB group showed larger differences in 
prosodic and acoustic features. Machine-learning classifiers using these speech 
features achieved 87.0% accuracy for AD versus CN, 93.2% for DLB versus CN, and 
87.4% for AD versus DLB.
DISCUSSION: Our findings indicate the discriminative differences in speech 
features in AD and DLB and the feasibility of using these features in 
combination as a screening tool for identifying/differentiating AD and DLB.
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
31
BACKGROUND AND AIM: Depression is often accompanied by thoughts of self-harm, 
which are a strong predictor of subsequent suicide attempt and suicide death. 
Few empirical data are available regarding the temporal correlation between 
depression symptoms and suicidal ideation. We investigated the anecdotal concern 
that suicidal ideation may increase during a period of depression improvement.
DATA: Longitudinal Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ)-9 is a questionnaire of 9 
multiple-choice questions to assess the frequency of depressive symptoms within 
the previous two weeks. We analyzed a chronic depression treatment population's 
electronic health record (EHR) data, containing 610 patients' longitudinal PHQ-9 
scores (62% age 45 and older; 68% female) within 40 weeks.
METHODS: The irregular and sparse EHR data were transformed into continuous 
trajectories using Gaussian process regression. We first estimated the 
correlations between the symptoms (total score of the first 8 questions; PHQ-8) 
and suicide ideation (9th question score; Item 9) using the cross-correlation 
function. We then used an artificial neural network (ANN) to discover subtypes 
of depression patterns from the fitted depression trajectories. In addition, we 
conducted a separate analysis using the unfitted raw PHQ scores to examine 
PHQ-8's and Item 9's pattern changes.
RESULTS: Results showed that the majority of patients' PHQ-8 and Item 9 scores 
displayed strong temporal correlations. We found five patterns in the PHQ-8 and 
the Item 9 trajectories. We also found 8% - 13% of the patients have experienced 
an increase in suicidal ideation during the improvement of their PHQ-8. Using a 
trajectory-based method for subtype pattern detection in depression progression, 
we provided a better understanding of temporal correlations between depression 
symptoms over time.
32
Older adults aged 65 and above are at higher risk of falls. Predicting fall risk 
early can provide caregivers time to provide interventions, which could reduce 
the risk, potentially avoiding a possible fall. In this paper, we present an 
analysis of 6-month fall risk prediction in older adults using geriatric 
assessments, GAITRite measurements, and fall history. The geriatric assessments 
included were Activities of Daily Living (ADL), Instrumental Activities of Daily 
Living (IADL), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Geriatric Depression Scale 
(GDS), and Short Form 12 (SF12). These geriatric assessments are collected by 
staff nurses regularly in senior care facilities. From the GAITRite assessments 
on the residents, we included the Functional Ambulatory Profile (FAP) scores and 
gait speed to predict fall risk. We used the SHAP (SHapley Additive 
exPlanations) approach to explain our model predictions to understand which 
predictor variables contributed to increase or decrease the fall risk for an 
individual prediction. In case of a high fall risk prediction, predictor 
variables that contributed the most to elevate the risk could be further 
examined by the health providers for more personalized health interventions. We 
used the geriatric assessments, GAITRite measurements, and fall history data 
collected from 92 older adult residents (age = 86.2 ± 6.4, female = 57) to train 
machine learning models to predict 6-month fall risk. Our models predicted a 
6-month fall with an AUC of 0.80 (95% CI of 0.76-0.85), sensitivity of 0.82 (95% 
CI of 0.74-0.89), specificity of 0.72 (95% CI of 0.67-0.76), F1 score of 0.76 
(95% CI of 0.72-0.79), and accuracy of 0.75 (95% CI of 0.72-0.79). These results 
show that our early fall risk prediction method performs well in identifying 
residents who are at higher fall risk, which offers care providers and family 
members valuable time to perform preventive actions.
33
Early detection of cognitive decline involved in Alzheimer's Disease and Related 
Dementias (ADRD) in older adults living alone is essential for developing, 
planning, and initiating interventions and support systems to improve users' 
everyday function and quality of life. In this paper, we explore the voice 
commands using a Voice-Assistant System (VAS), i.e., Amazon Alexa, from 40 older 
adults who were either Healthy Control (HC) participants or Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) participants, age 65 or older. We evaluated the data collected 
from voice commands, cognitive assessments, and interviews and surveys using a 
structured protocol. We extracted 163 unique command-relevant features from each 
participant's use of the VAS. We then built machine-learning models including 
1-layer/2-layer neural networks, support vector machines, decision tree, and 
random forest, for classification and comparison with standard cognitive 
assessment scores, e.g., Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). Our 
classification models using fusion features achieved an accuracy of 68%, and our 
regression model resulted in a Root-Mean-Square Error (RMSE) score of 3.53. Our 
Decision Tree (DT) and Random Forest (RF) models using selected features 
achieved higher classification accuracy 80-90%. Finally, we analyzed the 
contribution of each feature set to the model output, thus revealing the 
commands and features most useful in inferring the participants' cognitive 
status. We found that features of overall performance, features of music-related 
commands, features of call-related commands, and features from Automatic Speech 
Recognition (ASR) were the top-four feature sets most impactful on inference 
accuracy. The results from this controlled study demonstrate the promise of 
future home-based cognitive assessments using Voice-Assistant Systems.
34
Dementia remains an extremely prevalent syndrome among older people and 
represents a major cause of disability and dependency. Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
accounts for the majority of dementia cases and stands as the most common 
neurodegenerative disease. Since age is the major risk factor for AD, the 
increase in lifespan not only represents a rise in the prevalence but also adds 
complexity to the diagnosis. Moreover, the lack of disease-modifying therapies 
highlights another constraint. A shift from a curative to a preventive approach 
is imminent and we are moving towards the application of personalized medicine 
where we can shape the best clinical intervention for an individual patient at a 
given point. This new step in medicine requires the most recent tools and 
analysis of enormous amounts of data where the application of artificial 
intelligence (AI) plays a critical role on the depiction of disease-patient 
dynamics, crucial in reaching early/optimal diagnosis, monitoring and 
intervention. Predictive models and algorithms are the key elements in this 
innovative field. In this review, we present an overview of relevant topics 
regarding the application of AI in AD, detailing the algorithms and their 
applications in the fields of drug discovery, and biomarkers.
35
The issue of public health in Korea has attracted significant attention given 
the aging of the country's population, which has created many types of social 
problems. The approach proposed in this article aims to address dementia, one of 
the most significant symptoms of aging and a public health care issue in Korea. 
The Korean National Health Insurance Service Senior Cohort Database contains 
personal medical data of every citizen in Korea. There are many different 
medical history patterns between individuals with dementia and normal controls. 
The approach used in this study involved examination of personal medical history 
features from personal disease history, sociodemographic data, and personal 
health examinations to develop a prediction model. The prediction model used a 
support-vector machine learning technique to perform a 10-fold cross-validation 
analysis. The experimental results demonstrated promising performance (80.9% 
F-measure). The proposed approach supported the significant influence of 
personal medical history features during an optimal observation period. It is 
anticipated that a biomedical "big data"-based disease prediction model may 
assist the diagnosis of any disease more correctly.
36
Testamentary capacity (TC), a set of capacities involved in making a valid Will, 
has become prominent in capacity evaluations due to the demographic increase in 
older persons and associated increase in cognitive impairment. The assessment of 
contemporaneous TC follows the criteria derived from the Banks v Goodfellow 
case, which do not bind capacity solely on the basis of presence of a cognitive 
disorder. Although effort is being made for establishing more objective criteria 
for TC judgment, variations in situational complexity call for incorporating the 
different circumstances of the testator in capacity assessment. Artificial 
intelligence (AI) technologies such as statistical machine learning have been 
used in forensic psychiatry mainly for the prediction of aggressive behavior and 
recidivism but little has been done in the area of capacity assessment. However, 
the statistical machine learning model responses are difficult to interpret and 
explain, which presents problems with regard to the new General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) of the European Union. In this Perspective we present a 
framework for an AI decision support tool for TC assessment. The framework is 
based on AI decision support and explainable AI (XAI) technology.
37
Depression is a serious problem for many older adults but is too often 
undetected by the person, family or providers. Although vocal patterns have been 
successfully used to detect and predict depression in adults aged 18 to 
65 years, no studies to date have included older adults. The study purpose was 
to determine whether vocal patterns associated with clinical depression in 
younger people also signify depression in older adults. An observational, 
repeated measures design was used to enroll 46 volunteer older adults who 
completed a semi-structured interview composed the 9-item Patient Health 
Questionnaire or PHQ-9 depression scale and selected speech measures. Recorded 
interviews were analysed by machine learning algorithms to evaluate whether 
vocal patterns may predict presence of depression in older adults. In this 
study, using the PHQ-9 and a supervised machine learning algorithm accurately 
predicted high and low depression scores between 86% and 92% of the time. Change 
in raw PHQ-9 scores between interview cycles was predicted within 1.17 points. 
These results provide strong and promising evidence that vocal patterns can be 
used effectively to detect clinical depression in adults who are 65 years and 
older.
38
The elderly have an elevated risk of clinical depression because of isolation 
from family and friends and a reticence to report their emotional states. The 
present study explored whether data from a commercial neuroscience platform 
could predict low mood and low energy in members of a retirement community. 
Neurophysiologic data were collected continuously for three weeks at 1Hz and 
averaged into hourly and daily measures, while mood and energy were captured 
with self-reports. Two neurophysiologic measures averaged over a day predicted 
low mood and low energy with 68% and 75% accuracy. Principal components analysis 
showed that neurologic variables were statistically associated with mood and 
energy two days in advance. Applying machine learning to hourly data classified 
low mood and low energy with 99% and 98% accuracy. Two-day lagged hourly 
neurophysiologic data predicted low mood and low energy with 98% and 96% 
accuracy. This study demonstrates that continuous measurement of 
neurophysiologic variables may be an effective way to reduce the incidence of 
mood disorders in vulnerable people by identifying when interventions are 
needed.
39
The 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-15) is widely used to screen for 
depressive symptoms among older populations. This study aimed to develop and 
validate a questionnaire-free, machine-learning model as an alternative triage 
test for the GDS-15 among community-dwelling older adults. The best models were 
the random forest (RF) and deep-insight visible neural network by internal 
validation, but both performances were undifferentiated by external validation. 
The AUROC of the RF model was 0.619 (95% CI 0.610 to 0.627) for the external 
validation set with a non-local ethnic group. Our triage test can allow 
healthcare professionals to preliminarily screen for depressive symptoms in 
older adults without using a questionnaire. If the model shows positive results, 
then the GDS-15 can be used for follow-up measures. This preliminary screening 
will save a lot of time and energy for healthcare providers and older adults, 
especially those persons who are illiterate.
40
BACKGROUND: Our aim was to explore whether a two-step hybrid machine learning 
model has the potential to discover the onset of depression in home-based older 
adults.
METHODS: Depression data (collected in the year 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2018) of 
home-based older Chinese (n = 2,548) recruited in the China Health and 
Retirement Longitudinal Study were included in the current analysis. The long 
short-term memory network (LSTM) was applied to identify the risk factors of 
participants in 2015 utilizing the first 2 waves of data. Based on the 
identified predictors, three ML classification algorithms (i.e., gradient 
boosting decision tree, support vector machine and random forest) were evaluated 
with a 10-fold cross-validation procedure and a metric of the area under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) to estimate the depressive 
outcome.
RESULTS: Time-varying predictors of the depression were successfully identified 
by LSTM (mean squared error =0.8). The mean AUCs of the three predictive models 
had a range from 0.703 to 0.749. Among the prediction variables, self-reported 
health status, cognition, sleep time, self-reported memory and ADL (activities 
of daily living) disorder were the top five important variables.
CONCLUSIONS: A two-step hybrid model based on "LSTM+ML" framework can be robust 
in predicting depression over a 5-year period with easily accessible 
sociodemographic and health information.
41
Dementia is a neurodegenerative disorder that affects the older adult 
population. To date, no cure or treatment to change its course is available. 
Since changes in the brains of affected individuals could be evidenced as early 
as 10 years before the onset of symptoms, prognosis research should consider 
this time frame. This study investigates a broad decision tree multifactorial 
approach for the prediction of dementia, considering 75 variables regarding 
demographic, social, lifestyle, medical history, biochemical tests, physical 
examination, psychological assessment and health instruments. Previous work on 
dementia prognoses with machine learning did not consider a broad range of 
factors in a large time frame. The proposed approach investigated predictive 
factors for dementia and possible prognostic subgroups. This study used data 
from the ongoing multipurpose Swedish National Study on Aging and Care, 
consisting of 726 subjects (91 presented dementia diagnosis in 10 years). The 
proposed approach achieved an AUC of 0.745 and Recall of 0.722 for the 10-year 
prognosis of dementia. Most of the variables selected by the tree are related to 
modifiable risk factors; physical strength was important across all ages. Also, 
there was a lack of variables related to health instruments routinely used for 
the dementia diagnosis.
42
Late-life depression (LLD) is a major public health concern. Despite the 
availability of effective treatments for depression, barriers to screening and 
diagnosis still exist. The use of current standardized depression assessments 
can lead to underdiagnosis or misdiagnosis due to subjective symptom reporting 
and the distinct cognitive, psychomotor, and somatic features of LLD. To 
overcome these limitations, there has been a growing interest in the development 
of objective measures of depression using artificial intelligence (AI) 
technologies such as natural language processing (NLP). NLP approaches focus on 
the analysis of acoustic and linguistic aspects of human language derived from 
text and speech and can be integrated with machine learning approaches to 
classify depression and its severity. In this review, we will provide rationale 
for the use of NLP methods to study depression using speech, summarize previous 
research using NLP in LLD, compare findings to younger adults with depression 
and older adults with other clinical conditions, and discuss future directions 
including the use of complementary AI strategies to fully capture the spectrum 
of LLD.
43
Alzheimer's disease has been one of the major concerns recently. Around 45 
million people are suffering from this disease. Alzheimer's is a degenerative 
brain disease with an unspecified cause and pathogenesis which primarily affects 
older people. The main cause of Alzheimer's disease is Dementia, which 
progressively damages the brain cells. People lost their thinking ability, 
reading ability, and many more from this disease. A machine learning system can 
reduce this problem by predicting the disease. The main aim is to recognize 
Dementia among various patients. This paper represents the result and analysis 
regarding detecting Dementia from various machine learning models. The Open 
Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS) dataset has been used for the 
development of the system. The dataset is small, but it has some significant 
values. The dataset has been analyzed and applied in several machine learning 
models. Support vector machine, logistic regression, decision tree, and random 
forest have been used for prediction. First, the system has been run without 
fine-tuning and then with fine-tuning. Comparing the results, it is found that 
the support vector machine provides the best results among the models. It has 
the best accuracy in detecting Dementia among numerous patients. The system is 
simple and can easily help people by detecting Dementia among them.
44
While frailty corresponds to a multisystem failure, geriatric assessment can 
recognize multiple pathophysiological lesions and age changes. Up to now, a few 
frailty indexes have been introduced, presenting definitions of psychological 
problems, dysregulations in nutritional intake, behavioral abnormalities, and 
daily functions, genetic, environmental, and cardiovascular comorbidities. The 
geriatric evaluation includes a vast range of health professionals; therefore, 
we describe a broad range of applications and frailty scales-biomarkers to 
investigate and formulate the relationship between frailty lesions, diagnosis, 
monitoring, and treatment. Additionally, artificial intelligence applications 
and computational tools are presented, targeting a more efficacy individualized 
geriatric management of healthy aging.
45
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is one of the most common causes of dementia, mostly 
affecting the elderly population. Currently, there is no proper diagnostic tool 
or method available for the detection of AD. The present study used two distinct 
data sets of AD genes, which could be potential biomarkers in the diagnosis. The 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) curated from both datasets were used for 
machine learning classification, tissue expression annotation and co-expression 
analysis. Further, CNPY3, GPR84, HIST1H2AB, HIST1H2AE, IFNAR1, LMO3, MYO18A, 
N4BP2L1, PML, SLC4A4, ST8SIA4, TLE1 and N4BP2L1 were identified as highly 
significant DEGs and exhibited co-expression with other query genes. Moreover, a 
tissue expression study found that these genes are also expressed in the brain 
tissue. In addition to the earlier studies for marker gene identification, we 
have considered a different set of machine learning classifiers to improve the 
accuracy rate from the analysis. Amongst all the six classification algorithms, 
J48 emerged as the best classifier, which could be used for differentiating 
healthy and diseased samples. SMO/SVM and Logit Boost further followed J48 to 
achieve the classification accuracy.
46
Walking ability of elderly individuals, who suffer from walking difficulties, is 
limited, which restricts their mobility independence. The physical health and 
well-being of the elderly population are affected by their level of physical 
activity. Therefore, monitoring daily activities can help improve the quality of 
life. This becomes especially a huge challenge for those, who suffer from 
dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Thus, it is of great importance for personnel 
in care homes/rehabilitation centers to monitor their daily activities and 
progress. Unlike normal subjects, it is required to place the sensor on the back 
of this group of patients, which makes it even more challenging to detect 
walking from other activities. With the latest advancements in the field of 
health sensing and sensor technology, a huge amount of accelerometer data can be 
easily collected. In this study, a Machine Learning (ML) based algorithm was 
developed to analyze the accelerometer data collected from patients with walking 
difficulties, who live in one of the municipalities in Denmark. The ML algorithm 
is capable of accurately classifying the walking activity of these individuals 
with different walking abnormalities. Various statistical, temporal, and 
spectral features were extracted from the time series data collected using an 
accelerometer sensor placed on the back of the participants. The back sensor 
placement is desirable in patients with dementia and Alzheimer's disease since 
they may remove visible sensors to them due to the nature of their diseases. 
Then, an evolutionary optimization algorithm called Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO) was used to select a subset of features to be used in the classification 
step. Four different ML classifiers such as k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN), Random 
Forest (RF), Stacking Classifier (Stack), and Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGB) 
were trained and compared on an accelerometry dataset consisting of 20 
participants. These models were evaluated using the leave-one-group-out 
cross-validation (LOGO-CV) technique. The Stack model achieved the best 
performance with average sensitivity, positive predictive values (precision), 
F1-score, and accuracy of 86.85%, 93.25%, 88.81%, and 93.32%, respectively, to 
classify walking episodes. In general, the empirical results confirmed that the 
proposed models are capable of classifying the walking episodes despite the 
challenging sensor placement on the back of the patients, who suffer from 
walking disabilities.
47
Artificial intelligence (AI) in healthcare aims to learn patterns in large 
multimodal datasets within and across individuals. These patterns may either 
improve understanding of current clinical status or predict a future outcome. AI 
holds the potential to revolutionize geriatric mental health care and research 
by supporting diagnosis, treatment, and clinical decision-making. However, much 
of this momentum is driven by data and computer scientists and engineers and 
runs the risk of being disconnected from pragmatic issues in clinical practice. 
This interprofessional perspective bridges the experiences of clinical 
scientists and data science. We provide a brief overview of AI with the main 
focus on possible applications and challenges of using AI-based approaches for 
research and clinical care in geriatric mental health. We suggest future AI 
applications in geriatric mental health consider pragmatic considerations of 
clinical practice, methodological differences between data and clinical science, 
and address issues of ethics, privacy, and trust.
48
BACKGROUND: Machine learning (ML) is an emerging tool for predicting need of 
end-of-life discussion and palliative care, by using mortality as a proxy. But 
deaths, unforeseen by emergency physicians at time of the emergency department 
(ED) visit, might have a weaker association with the ED visit.
OBJECTIVES: To develop an ML algorithm that predicts unsurprising deaths within 
30 days after ED discharge.
METHODS: In this retrospective registry study, we included all ED attendances 
within the Swedish region of Halland in 2015 and 2016. All registered deaths 
within 30 days after ED discharge were classified as either "surprising" or 
"unsurprising" by an adjudicating committee with three senior specialists in 
emergency medicine. ML algorithms were developed for the death subclasses by 
using Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF), and Support Vector Machine 
(SVM).
RESULTS: Of all 30-day deaths (n = 148), 76% (n = 113) were not surprising to 
the adjudicating committee. The most common diseases were advanced stage cancer, 
multidisease/frailty, and dementia. By using LR, RF, and SVM, mean area under 
the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC-AUC) of unsurprising deaths in 
the test set were 0.950 (SD 0.008), 0.944 (SD 0.007), and 0.949 (SD 0.007), 
respectively. For all mortality, the ROC-AUCs for LR, RF, and SVM were 0.924 (SD 
0.012), 0.922 (SD 0.009), and 0.931 (SD 0.008). The difference in prediction 
performance between all and unsurprising death was statistically significant (P 
< .001) for all three models.
CONCLUSION: In patients discharged to home from the ED, three-quarters of all 
30-day deaths did not surprise an adjudicating committee with emergency medicine 
specialists. When only unsurprising deaths were included, ML mortality 
prediction improved significantly.
49
The study demonstrated an application of machine learning techniques in building 
a depression prediction model. We used the NSHAP II data (3,377 subjects and 261 
variables) and built the models using a logistic regression with and without L1 
regularization. Depression prediction rates ranged 58.33% to 90.48% and 83.33% 
to 90.44% in the model with and without L1 regularization, respectively. The 
moderate to high prediction rates imply that the machine learning algorithms 
built the prediction models successfully.
50
With growing use of machine learning algorithms and big data in health 
applications, digital measures, such as digital biomarkers, have become highly 
relevant in digital health. In this paper, we focus on one important use case, 
the long-term continuous monitoring of cognitive ability in older adults. 
Cognitive ability is a factor both for long-term monitoring of people living 
alone as well as a relevant outcome in clinical studies. In this work, we 
propose a new potential digital biomarker for cognitive abilities based on 
location eigenbehaviour obtained from contactless ambient sensors. Indoor 
location information obtained from passive infrared sensors is used to build a 
location matrix covering several weeks of measurement. Based on the eigenvectors 
of this matrix, the reconstruction error is calculated for various numbers of 
used eigenvectors. The reconstruction error in turn is used to predict cognitive 
ability scores collected at baseline, using linear regression. Additionally, 
classification of normal versus pathological cognition level is performed using 
a support-vector machine. Prediction performance is strong for high levels of 
cognitive ability but grows weaker for low levels of cognitive ability. 
Classification into normal and older adults with mild cognitive impairment, 
using age and the reconstruction error, shows high discriminative performance 
with an ROC AUC of 0.94. This is an improvement of 0.08 as compared with a 
classification with age only. Due to the unobtrusive method of measurement, this 
potential digital biomarker of cognitive ability can be obtained entirely 
unobtrusively-it does not impose any patient burden. In conclusion, the usage of 
the reconstruction error is a strong potential digital biomarker for binary 
classification and, to a lesser extent, for more detailed prediction of 
inter-individual differences in cognition.
51
Identification of individuals with increased risk of major adverse 
cardiovascular events (MACE) is important. However, algorithms specific to the 
elderly are lacking. Data were analysed from a randomised trial involving 18,548 
participants ≥ 70 years old (mean age 75.4 years), without prior cardiovascular 
disease events, dementia or physical disability. MACE included coronary heart 
disease death, fatal or nonfatal ischaemic stroke or myocardial infarction. 
Potential predictors tested were based on prior evidence and using a 
machine-learning approach. Cox regression analyses were used to calculate 5-year 
predicted risk, and discrimination evaluated from receiver operating 
characteristic curves. Calibration was also assessed, and the findings 
internally validated using bootstrapping. External validation was performed in 
25,138 healthy, elderly individuals in the primary care environment. During 
median follow-up of 4.7 years, 594 MACE occurred. Predictors in the final model 
included age, sex, smoking, systolic blood pressure, high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (HDL-c), non-HDL-c, serum creatinine, diabetes and intake of 
antihypertensive agents. With variable selection based on machine-learning, age, 
sex and creatinine were the most important predictors. The final model resulted 
in an area under the curve (AUC) of 68.1 (95% confidence intervals 65.9; 70.4). 
The model had an AUC of 67.5 in internal and 64.2 in external validation. The 
model rank-ordered risk well but underestimated absolute risk in the external 
validation cohort. A model predicting incident MACE in healthy, elderly 
individuals includes well-recognised, potentially reversible risk factors and 
notably, renal function. Calibration would be necessary when used in other 
populations.
52
Suicide poses a serious problem globally, especially among the elderly 
population. To tackle the issue, this study aimed to develop a model for 
predicting suicide by using machine learning based on the elderly population. To 
obtain a large sample, the study used the big data health screening cohort 
provided by the National Health Insurance Sharing Service. By applying a machine 
learning technique, a predictive model that comprehensively utilized various 
factors was developed to select the elderly aged > 65 years at risk of suicide. 
A total of 48,047 subjects were included in the analysis. Individuals who died 
by suicide were older, and the number of men was significantly greater. The 
suicide group had a more prominent history of depression, with the use of 
medicaments significantly higher. Specifically, the prescription of 
benzodiazepines alone was associated with a high suicide risk. Furthermore, body 
mass index, waist circumference, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein 
level were lower in the suicide group. We developed a model for predicting 
suicide by using machine learning based on the elderly population. This suicide 
prediction model can satisfy the performance to some extent by employing only 
the medical service usage behavior without subjective reports.
53
Early detection is the key to successfully tackling dementia, a neurocognitive 
condition common among the elderly. Therefore, screening using technological 
platforms such as mobile applications (apps) may provide an important 
opportunity to speed up the diagnosis process and improve accessibility. Due to 
the lack of research into dementia diagnosis and screening tools based on mobile 
apps, this systematic review aims to identify the available mobile-based 
dementia and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) apps using specific inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. More importantly, we critically analyse these tools in terms 
of their comprehensiveness, validity, performance, and the use of artificial 
intelligence (AI) techniques. The research findings suggest diagnosticians in a 
clinical setting use dementia screening apps such as ALZ and CognitiveExams 
since they cover most of the domains for the diagnosis of neurocognitive 
disorders. Further, apps such as Cognity and ACE-Mobile have great potential as 
they use machine learning (ML) and AI techniques, thus improving the accuracy of 
the outcome and the efficiency of the screening process. Lastly, there was 
overlapping among the dementia screening apps in terms of activities and 
questions they contain therefore mapping these apps to the designated cognitive 
domains is a challenging task, which has been done in this research.
54
INTRODUCTION: Geriatric patients with dementia incur higher healthcare costs and 
longer hospital stays than other geriatric patients. We aimed to identify risk 
factors for hospitalization outcomes that could be mitigated early to improve 
outcomes and impact overall quality of life.
METHODS: We identified risk factors, that is, demographics, hospital 
complications, pre-admission, and post-admission risk factors including medical 
history and comorbidities, affecting hospitalization outcomes determined by 
hospital stays and discharge dispositions. Over 150 clinical and demographic 
factors of 15,678 encounters (8407 patients) were retrieved from our 
institution's data warehouse. We further narrowed them down to twenty factors 
through feature selection engineering by using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and 
Glmnet. We developed an explainable machine-learning model to predict 
hospitalization outcomes among geriatric patients with dementia.
RESULTS: Our model is based on stacking ensemble learning and achieved accuracy 
of 95.6% and area under the curve (AUC) of 0.757. It outperformed prevalent 
methods of risk assessment for encounters of patients with Alzheimer's disease 
dementia (ADD) (4993), vascular dementia (VD) (4173), Parkinson's disease with 
dementia (PDD) (3735), and other unspecified dementias (OUD) (2777). Top 
identified hospitalization outcome risk factors, mostly from medical history, 
include encephalopathy, number of medical problems at admission, pressure 
ulcers, urinary tract infections, falls, admission source, age, race, anemia, 
etc., with several overlaps in multi-dementia groups.
DISCUSSION: Our model identified several predictive factors that can be modified 
or intervened so that efforts can be made to prevent recurrence or mitigate 
their adverse effects. Knowledge of the modifiable risk factors would help guide 
early interventions for patients at high risk for poor hospitalization outcome 
as defined by hospital stays longer than seven days, undesirable discharge 
disposition, or both. The interventions include starting specific protocols on 
modifiable risk factors like encephalopathy, falls, and infections, where 
non-existent or not routine, to improve hospitalization outcomes of geriatric 
patients with dementia.
HIGHLIGHTS: A total 15,678 encounters of Geriatrics with dementia with a final 
20 risk factors.Developed a predictive model for hospitalization outcomes for 
multi-dementia types.Risk factors for each type were identified including those 
amenable to interventions.Top factors are encephalopathy, pressure ulcers, 
urinary tract infection (UTI), falls, and admission source.With accuracy of 
95.6%, our ensemble predictive model outperforms other models.
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
55
BACKGROUND: Dementia is a global public health priority due to rapid growth of 
the aging population. As China has the world's largest population with dementia, 
this debilitating disease has created tremendous challenges for older adults, 
family caregivers, and health care systems on the mainland nationwide. However, 
public awareness and knowledge of the disease remain limited in Chinese society.
OBJECTIVE: This study examines online public discourse and sentiment toward 
dementia among the Chinese public on a leading Chinese social media platform 
Weibo. Specifically, this study aims to (1) assess and examine public discourse 
and sentiment toward dementia among the Chinese public, (2) determine the extent 
to which dementia-related discourse and sentiment vary among different user 
groups (ie, government, journalists/news media, scientists/experts, and the 
general public), and (3) characterize temporal trends in public discourse and 
sentiment toward dementia among different user groups in China over the past 
decade.
METHODS: In total, 983,039 original dementia-related posts published by 347,599 
unique users between 2010 and 2021, together with their user information, were 
analyzed. Machine learning analytical techniques, including topic modeling, 
sentiment analysis, and semantic network analyses, were used to identify salient 
themes/topics and their variations across different user groups (ie, government, 
journalists/news media, scientists/experts, and the general public).
RESULTS: Topic modeling results revealed that symptoms, prevention, and social 
support are the most prevalent dementia-related themes on Weibo. Posts about 
dementia policy/advocacy have been increasing in volume since 2018. Raising 
awareness is the least discussed topic over time. Sentiment analysis indicated 
that Weibo users generally attach negative attitudes/emotions to dementia, with 
the general public holding a more negative attitude than other user groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, dementia has received greater public attention on social 
media since 2018. In particular, discussions related to dementia advocacy and 
policy are gaining momentum in China. However, disparaging language is still 
used to describe dementia in China; therefore, a nationwide initiative is needed 
to alter the public discourse on dementia. The results contribute to previous 
research by providing a macrolevel understanding of the Chinese public's 
discourse and attitudes toward dementia, which is essential for building 
national education and policy initiatives to create a dementia-friendly society. 
Our findings indicate that dementia is associated with negative sentiments, and 
symptoms and prevention dominate public discourse. The development of strategies 
to address unfavorable perceptions of dementia requires policy and public health 
attention. The results further reveal that an urgent need exists to increase 
public knowledge about dementia. Social media platforms potentially could be 
leveraged for future dementia education interventions to increase dementia 
awareness and promote positive attitudes.
56
BACKGROUND: It is important to diagnose depression in Parkinson's disease (DPD) 
as soon as possible and identify the predictors of depression to improve quality 
of life in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients.
AIM: To develop a model for predicting DPD based on the support vector machine, 
while considering sociodemographic factors, health habits, Parkinson's symptoms, 
sleep behavior disorders, and neuropsychiatric indicators as predictors and 
provide baseline data for identifying DPD.
METHODS: This study analyzed 223 of 335 patients who were 60 years or older with 
PD. Depression was measured using the 30 items of the Geriatric Depression 
Scale, and the explanatory variables included PD-related motor signs, rapid eye 
movement sleep behavior disorders, and neuropsychological tests. The support 
vector machine was used to develop a DPD prediction model.
RESULTS: When the effects of PD motor symptoms were compared using "functional 
weight", late motor complications (occurrence of levodopa-induced dyskinesia) 
were the most influential risk factors for Parkinson's symptoms.
CONCLUSION: It is necessary to develop customized screening tests that can 
detect DPD in the early stage and continuously monitor high-risk groups based on 
the factors related to DPD derived from this predictive model in order to 
maintain the emotional health of PD patients.
reserved.
57
BACKGROUND: no studies have compared the predictive validity of different 
dementia risk prediction models in Australia.
OBJECTIVES: (i) to investigate the predictive validity of the Australian 
National University-Alzheimer's Disease Risk Index (ANU-ADRI), LIfestyle for 
BRAin Health (LIBRA) Index and cardiovascular risk factors, ageing and dementia 
study (CAIDE) models for predicting probable dementia/cognitive impairment in an 
Australian cohort. (ii) To develop and assess the predictive validity of a new 
hybrid model combining variables from the three models.
METHODS: the Hunter Community Study (HCS) included 3,306 adults aged 55-85 years 
with a median follow-up of 7.1 years. Probable dementia/cognitive impairment was 
defined using Admitted Patient Data Collection, dispensing of cholinesterase 
inhibitors or memantine, or a cognitive test. Model validity was assessed by 
calibration and discrimination. A hybrid model was developed using deep neural 
network analysis, a machine learning method.
RESULTS: 120 (3.6%) participants developed probable dementia/cognitive 
impairment. Mean calibration by ANU-ADRI, LIBRA, CAIDE and the hybrid model was 
19, 0.5, 4.7 and 3.4%, respectively. The discrimination of the models was 0.65 
(95% CI 0.60-0.70), 0.65 (95% CI 0.60-0.71), 0.54 (95% CI 0.49-0.58) and 0.80 
(95% CI 0.78-0.83), respectively.
CONCLUSION: ANU-ADRI and LIBRA were better dementia prediction tools than CAIDE 
for identification of high-risk individuals in this cohort. ANU-ADRI 
overestimated and LIBRA underestimated the risk. The new hybrid model had a 
higher predictive performance than the other models but it needs to be validated 
independently in longitudinal studies.
British Geriatrics Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
58
Update of
59
BACKGROUND: Estimates of 'brain-predicted age' quantify apparent brain age 
60
With global aging, the number of elderly with physical disabilities is also 
increasing. Compared with the ordinary elderly, the elderly who lose their 
independence are more likely to have the symptoms of depression. Reducing 
depression may help to alleviate the disability process of those who find 
themselves in the disabled stages. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to 
explore the predictive effects of demographic characteristics, health behavior, 
health status, family relations, social relations, and subjective attitude on 
depression in rural and urban disabled elderly to improve early depression 
symptom recognition.A total of 1460 older adults aged 60 and disabled were 
selected from China Family Panel Studies (CFPS). Depression was assessed 
according to The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D). This 
paper used the random forest classifier to predict the depression of the 
disabled elderly from six aspects: demographic characteristics, health status, 
health behavior, family relationship, and social relationship. The prediction 
model was established based on 70% of the training set and 30% of the test set. 
The depression rate of rural disabled elderly was 57.67%, and that of urban 
disabled elderly was 44.59%. The mean values of the 10-k cross-validated results 
were 0.71 in rural areas and 0.70 in urban areas. AUC:0.71, specificity: 65.3%, 
sensitivity: 80.6% for rural disabled elderly with depression; AUC:0.78, 
specificity: 78.1%, sensitivity: 64.2% for urban disabled elderly with 
depression, respectively. There are apparent differences in the top ten 
predictors between rural and urban disabled elderly. The common predictors were 
self-rated health, changing in perceived health, disease or accidence experience 
within the past 2 weeks, life satisfaction, trusting people, BMI, and having 
trust in the future. Non-common predictors were chronic diseases, neighborly 
relations, total medical expenses within 1 year, community emotion, sleep 
duration, and family per capita income. Using random forest data to predict the 
depression of the disabled elderly may lead to early detection of depression.
61
Introduction: Social isolation and loneliness (SI/L) are growing problems with 
serious health implications for older adults, especially in light of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. We examined transcripts from semi-structured interviews with 
97 older adults (mean age 83 years) to identify linguistic features of SI/L. 
Methods: Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods were used to identify 
relevant interview segments (responses to specific questions), extract the type 
and number of social contacts and linguistic features such as sentiment, 
parts-of-speech, and syntactic complexity. We examined: (1) associations of 
NLP-derived assessments of social relationships and linguistic features with 
validated self-report assessments of social support and loneliness; and (2) 
important linguistic features for detecting individuals with higher level of 
SI/L by using machine learning (ML) models. Results: NLP-derived assessments of 
social relationships were associated with self-reported assessments of social 
support and loneliness, though these associations were stronger in women than in 
men. Usage of first-person plural pronouns was negatively associated with 
loneliness in women and positively associated with emotional support in men. ML 
analysis using leave-one-out methodology showed good performance (F1 = 0.73, AUC 
= 0.75, specificity = 0.76, and sensitivity = 0.69) of the binary classification 
models in detecting individuals with higher level of SI/L. Comparable 
performance were also observed when classifying social and emotional support 
measures. Using ML models, we identified several linguistic features (including 
use of first-person plural pronouns, sentiment, sentence complexity, and 
sentence similarity) that most strongly predicted scores on scales for 
loneliness and social support. Discussion: Linguistic data can provide unique 
insights into SI/L among older adults beyond scale-based assessments, though 
there are consistent gender differences. Future research studies that 
incorporate diverse linguistic features as well as other behavioral data-streams 
may be better able to capture the complexity of social functioning in older 
adults and identification of target subpopulations for future interventions. 
Given the novelty, use of NLP should include prospective consideration of bias, 
fairness, accountability, and related ethical and social implications.
62
BACKGROUND: With the accelerating aging process, the number of participants with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is rising sharply, causing a huge economic burden.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to identify blood protein and metabolic biomarkers 
and explore the diagnostic model for AD among elderly in southeast China.
METHODS: We established a cohort among population with high risk AD in Zhejiang 
Province in 2018. Case and control groups each consisting of 45 subjects, 
matched for gender and age, were randomly selected from the cohort. Based on 
bioinformatics research, PRM/MRM technology was used to detect candidate 
biomarkers. Ensemble-based feature selection and machine learning methods was 
used to screen important variables as risk indicators for AD. Based on the risk 
biomarkers, the risk diagnostic model of AD in the elderly was constructed and 
evaluated.
RESULTS: Cystine and CPB2 were evaluated as biomarkers. The diagnostic model is 
constructed using logistic regression algorithm with the best cutoff value, 
sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 0.554, 0.895, 0.976, and 0.938, 
respectively, which determined by Youden's index. The results showed that the 
model with protein and metabolite had a high efficiency.
CONCLUSION: It showed that the diagnostic model constructed by Cystine and CPB2 
had a good performance on sample classification. This study was of great 
significance for the early screening and diagnosis of AD, timely intervention, 
control and delay the development of dementia in southeast China.
63
INTRODUCTION: Prolonged Hospital Length of Stay (PLOS) is an indicator of 
deteriorated efficiency in Quality of Care. One goal of public health management 
is to reduce PLOS by identifying its most relevant predictors. The objective of 
this study is to explore Machine Learning (ML) models that best predict PLOS.
METHODS: Our dataset was collected from the French Medico-Administrative 
database (PMSI) as a retrospective cohort study of all discharges in the year 
2015 from a large university hospital in France (APHM). The study outcomes were 
LOS transformed into a binary variable (long vs. short LOS) according to the 
90th percentile (14 days). Logistic regression (LR), classification and 
regression trees (CART), random forest (RF), gradient boosting (GB) and neural 
networks (NN) were applied to the collected data. The predictive performance of 
the models was evaluated using the area under the ROC curve (AUC).
RESULTS: Our analysis included 73,182 hospitalizations, of which 7,341 (10.0%) 
led to PLOS. The GB classifier was the most performant model with the highest 
AUC (0.810), superior to all the other models (all p-values <0.0001). The 
performance of the RF, GB and NN models (AUC ranged from 0.808 to 0.810) was 
superior to that of the LR model (AUC = 0.795); all p-values <0.0001. In 
contrast, LR was superior to CART (AUC = 0.786), p < 0.0001. The variable most 
predictive of the PLOS was the destination of the patient after hospitalization 
to other institutions. The typical clinical profile of these patients (17.5% of 
the sample) was the elderly patient, admitted in emergency, for a trauma, a 
neurological or a cardiovascular pathology, more often institutionalized, with 
more comorbidities notably mental health problems, dementia and hemiplegia.
DISCUSSION: The integration of ML, particularly the GB algorithm, may be useful 
for health-care professionals and bed managers to better identify patients at 
risk of PLOS. These findings underscore the need to strengthen hospitals through 
targeted allocation to meet the needs of an aging population.
Francis Group.
64
Erratum in
65
Objective: To explore the predictive value of machine learning in cognitive 
66
Dementia is a cognitive impairment that poses a global threat. Current dementia 
treatments slow the progression of the disease. The timing of starting such 
treatment markedly affects the effectiveness of the treatment. Some experts 
mentioned that the optimal timing for starting the currently available treatment 
in order to delay progression to dementia is the mild cognitive impairment 
stage, which is the prior stage of dementia. However, medical records are 
typically only available at a later stage, i.e., from the early or middle stage 
of dementia. In order to address this limitation, this study developed a model 
using national health information data from 5 years prior, to predict dementia 
development 5 years in the future. The Senior Cohort Database, comprising 
550,000 samples, were used for model development. The F-measure of the model 
predicting dementia development after a 5-year incubation period was 77.38%. 
Models for a 1- and 3-year incubation period were also developed for comparative 
analysis of dementia risk factors. The three models had some risk factors in 
common, but also had unique risk factors, depending on the stage. For the common 
risk factors, a difference in disease severity was confirmed. These findings 
indicate that the diagnostic criteria and treatment strategy for dementia should 
differ depending on the timing. Furthermore, since the results of this study 
present new dementia risk factors that have not been reported previously, this 
study may also contribute to identification of new dementia risk factors.
67
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia worldwide. Early 
detection is believed to be essential to disease management because it enables 
physicians to initiate treatment in patients with early-stage AD (early AD), 
with the possibility of stopping the disease or slowing disease progression, 
preserving function and ultimately reducing disease burden. The purpose of this 
study was to review prior research on the use of eye biomarkers and artificial 
intelligence (AI) for detecting AD and early AD. The PubMed database was 
searched to identify studies for review. Ocular biomarkers in AD research and AI 
research on AD were reviewed and summarized. According to numerous studies, 
there is a high likelihood that ocular biomarkers can be used to detect early 
AD: tears, corneal nerves, retina, visual function and, in particular, eye 
movement tracking have been identified as ocular biomarkers with the potential 
to detect early AD. However, there is currently no ocular biomarker that can be 
used to definitely detect early AD. A few studies that used AI with ocular 
biomarkers to detect AD reported promising results, demonstrating that using AI 
with ocular biomarkers through multimodal imaging could improve the accuracy of 
identifying AD patients. This strategy may become a screening tool for detecting 
early AD in older patients prior to the onset of AD symptoms.
68
PURPOSE: To develop a machine learning model that predicts delirium risk in 
geriatric internal medicine inpatients.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study of internal medicine wards in a tertiary 
care hospital in China. Blinded observers assessed delirium using the Confusion 
Assessment Method (CAM). The data set was randomly divided into a training set 
(70%) and a test set (30%). The model was trained on the training set using the 
decision tree and the five-fold cross-validation, and then the model performance 
was evaluated on the test set. Under-sampling was used to address the class 
imbalance. The discriminatory power of the model was measured by the area under 
the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) and F1 score. The data set 
comprised 740 patients from March 2016 to January 2017.
RESULTS: The training set included 518 patients; the median (IQR) age was 84 
(79-87) years; 364 (70.3%) were men; 71 (13.7%) with delirium. The test set 
included 222 patients; the median (IQR) age was 84.5 (79-87) years; 163 (73.4%) 
were men; 30 (13.5%) with delirium. In total, the data set included 740 hospital 
admissions with a median (IQR) age of 84 (79-87) years, 527 (71.2%) were men, 
and 101 (13.6%) with delirium. From 32 potential predictors, we included five 
variables in the predictive model: depression, cognitive impairment, types of 
drugs, nutritional status, and activity of daily life (ADL). The mean AUC on the 
training set was 0.967, the AUC and F1 score on the test set was 0.950 and 
0.810, respectively. The model achieved 93.3% sensitivity, 94.3% specificity, 
71.8% positive predictive value, 98.9% negative predictive value, and 94.1% 
accuracy on the test set.
CONCLUSION: This machine learning model may allow more precise targeting of 
delirium prevention and could support clinical decision making in geriatric 
internal medicine wards.
69
Adult-onset dementia disorders represent a challenge for modern medicine. 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) represents the most diffused form of adult-onset 
dementias. For half a century, the diagnosis of AD was based on clinical and 
exclusion criteria, with an accuracy of 85%, which did not allow for a 
definitive diagnosis, which could only be confirmed by post-mortem evaluation. 
Machine learning research applied to Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) techniques 
can contribute to a faster diagnosis of AD and may contribute to predicting the 
evolution of the disease. It was also possible to predict individual dementia of 
older adults with AD screening data and ML classifiers. To predict the AD 
subject status, the MRI demographic information and pre-existing conditions of 
the patient can help to enhance the classifier performance. In this work, we 
proposed a framework based on supervised learning classifiers in the dementia 
subject categorization as either AD or non-AD based on longitudinal brain MRI 
features. Six different supervised classifiers are incorporated for the 
classification of AD subjects and results mentioned that the gradient boosting 
algorithm outperforms other models with 97.58% of accuracy.
70
Self-perceived health is a subjective health outcome that summarizes all the 
health conditions and is widely used in population health studies. Yet, despite 
its well-known relationship with survival, it is still unclear as to which 
health conditions are actually taken into account when making an individual 
assessment of one's own health. The aim of this paper is to assess the influence 
of four objective health conditions - IADLs, ADLs, chronic diseases, and 
depression - in predicting self-perceived health among Europeans by age group 
(50-64 and 65-79) and by sex. Classification trees (J48 algorithm), which 
pertains to the emerging Machine Learning techniques, were applied to predict 
self-perceived health according to the four abovementioned objective health 
conditions of European individuals in the sixth wave of the Survey of Health, 
Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) (n = 55,611). The four variables present 
different degrees of relevance in establishing predictions of self-perceived 
health values by age and by sex. Before the age of 65, chronic diseases have the 
greatest importance, while IADL limitations are more important in the 65-79 age 
group. Likewise, ADL limitations are more important for women free of chronic 
diseases in the 50-64 age group; however, these differences disappear among 
women in the older group. There is an evident degree of interplay between the 
objective health indicators of chronic diseases, ADLs, IADLs, and depression 
when predicting self-perceived health with a high level of accuracy. This 
interplay implies that self-perceived health summarizes different health 
conditions depending on age. Gender differences are only evident for the younger 
age group, whereas construction of self-perceived is the same for women and men 
among the older group. Therefore, none of these four indicators on its own is 
able to totally substitute self-perceived health.
71
Identifying the symptoms of the early stages of dementia is a difficult task, 
particularly for older adults living in residential care. Internet of Things 
(IoT) and smart environments can assist with the early detection of dementia, by 
nonintrusive monitoring of the daily activities of the older adults. In this 
work, we focus on the daily life activities of adults in a smart home setting to 
discover their potential cognitive anomalies using a public dataset. After 
analysing the dataset, extracting the features, and selecting distinctive 
features based on dynamic ranking, a classification model is built. We compare 
and contrast several machine learning approaches for developing a reliable and 
efficient model to identify the cognitive status of monitored adults. Using our 
predictive model and our approach of distinctive feature selection, we have 
achieved 90.74% accuracy in detecting the onset of dementia.
72
BACKGROUND: Brain atrophy is an important feature in dementia and is meaningful 
to explore a brain atrophy model to predict dementia. Using machine learning 
algorithm to establish a dementia model and cognitive function model based on 
brain atrophy characteristics is unstoppable.
METHOD: We acquired 157 dementia and 156 normal old people.s clinical 
information and MRI data, which contains 44 brain atrophy features, including 
visual scale assessment of brain atrophy and multiple linear measurement indexes 
and brain atrophy index. Five machine learning models were used to establish 
prediction models for dementia, general cognition, and subcognitive domains.
RESULTS: The extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) model had the best effect in 
predicting dementia, with a sensitivity of 0.645, a specificity of 0.839, and 
the area under curve (AUC) of 0.784. In this model, the important brain atrophy 
features for predicting dementia were temporal horn ratio, cella media index, 
suprasellar cistern ratio, and the thickness of the corpus callosum genu.
CONCLUSION: For nonstroke elderly people, the machine learning model based on 
clinical head MRI brain atrophy features had good predictive value for dementia, 
general cognitive impairment, immediate memory impairment, word fluency 
disorder, executive dysfunction, and visualspatial disorder.
73
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the leading causes of dementia among older 
people. In addition, a considerable portion of the world's population suffers 
from metabolic problems, such as Alzheimer's disease and diabetes. Alzheimer's 
disease affects the brain in a degenerative manner. As the elderly population 
grows, this illness can cause more people to become inactive by impairing their 
memory and physical functionality. This might impact their family members and 
the financial, economic, and social spheres. Researchers have recently 
investigated different machine learning and deep learning approaches to detect 
such diseases at an earlier stage. Early diagnosis and treatment of AD help 
patients to recover from it successfully and with the least harm. This paper 
proposes a machine learning model that comprises GaussianNB, Decision Tree, 
Random Forest, XGBoost, Voting Classifier, and GradientBoost to predict 
Alzheimer's disease. The model is trained using the open access series of 
imaging studies (OASIS) dataset to evaluate the performance in terms of 
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. Our findings showed that the voting 
classifier attained the highest validation accuracy of 96% for the AD dataset. 
Therefore, ML algorithms have the potential to drastically lower Alzheimer's 
disease annual mortality rates through accurate detection.
2023, Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
74
INTRODUCTION: Modern neurotechnology research employing state-of-the-art machine 
learning algorithms within the so-called "AI for social good" domain contributes 
to improving the well-being of individuals with a disability. Using digital 
health technologies, home-based self-diagnostics, or cognitive decline managing 
approaches with neuro-biomarker feedback may be helpful for older adults to 
remain independent and improve their wellbeing. We report research results on 
early-onset dementia neuro-biomarkers to scrutinize cognitive-behavioral 
intervention management and digital non-pharmacological therapies.
METHODS: We present an empirical task in the EEG-based passive brain-computer 
interface application framework to assess working memory decline for forecasting 
a mild cognitive impairment. The EEG responses are analyzed in a framework of a 
network neuroscience technique applied to EEG time series for evaluation and to 
confirm the initial hypothesis of possible ML application modeling mild 
cognitive impairment prediction.
RESULTS: We report findings from a pilot study group in Poland for a cognitive 
decline prediction. We utilize two emotional working memory tasks by analyzing 
EEG responses to facial emotions reproduced in short videos. A reminiscent 
interior image oddball task is also employed to validate the proposed 
methodology further.
DISCUSSION: The proposed three experimental tasks in the current pilot study 
showcase the critical utilization of artificial intelligence for early-onset 
dementia prognosis in older adults.
75
STUDY OBJECTIVES: Dementia is a growing cause of disability and loss of 
independence in the elderly, yet remains largely underdiagnosed. Early detection 
and classification of dementia can help close this diagnostic gap and improve 
management of disease progression. Altered oscillations in brain activity during 
sleep are an early feature of neurodegenerative diseases and be used to identify 
those on the verge of cognitive decline.
METHODS: Our observational cross-sectional study used a clinical dataset of 10 
784 polysomnography from 8044 participants. Sleep macro- and micro-structural 
features were extracted from the electroencephalogram (EEG). Microstructural 
features were engineered from spectral band powers, EEG coherence, spindle, and 
slow oscillations. Participants were classified as dementia (DEM), mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), or cognitively normal (CN) based on clinical 
diagnosis, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, Mini-Mental State Exam scores, 
clinical dementia rating, and prescribed medications. We trained logistic 
regression, support vector machine, and random forest models to classify 
patients into DEM, MCI, and CN groups.
RESULTS: For discriminating DEM versus CN, the best model achieved an area under 
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.78 and area under 
precision-recall curve (AUPRC) of 0.22. For discriminating MCI versus CN, the 
best model achieved an AUROC of 0.73 and AUPRC of 0.18. For discriminating DEM 
or MCI versus CN, the best model achieved an AUROC of 0.76 and AUPRC of 0.32.
CONCLUSIONS: Our dementia classification algorithms show promise for 
incorporating dementia screening techniques using routine sleep EEG. The 
findings strengthen the concept of sleep as a window into neurodegenerative 
diseases.
Research Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
76
BACKGROUND: Depression is highly prevalent and considered as the most common 
psychiatric disorder in home-based elderly, while study on forecasting 
depression risk in the elderly is still limited. In an endeavor to improve 
accuracy of depression forecasting, machine learning (ML) approaches have been 
recommended, in addition to the application of more traditional regression 
approaches.
METHODS: A prospective study was employed in home-based elderly Chinese, using 
baseline (2011) and follow-up (2013) data of the China Health and Retirement 
Longitudinal Study (CHARLS), a nationally representative cohort study. We 
compared four algorithms, including the regression-based models (logistic 
regression, lasso, ridge) and ML method (random forest). Model performance was 
assessed using repeated nested 10-fold cross-validation. As the main measure of 
predictive performance, we used the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC).
RESULTS: The mean AUCs of the four predictive models, logistic regression, 
lasso, ridge, and random forest, were 0.795, 0.794, 0.794, and 0.769, 
respectively. The main determinants were life satisfaction, self-reported 
memory, cognitive ability, ADL (activities of daily living) impairment, CESD-10 
score. Life satisfaction increased the odds ratio of a future depression by 
128.6% (logistic), 13.8% (lasso), and 13.2% (ridge), and cognitive ability was 
the most important predictor in random forest.
CONCLUSIONS: The three regression-based models and one ML algorithm performed 
equally well in differentiating between a future depression case and a 
non-depression case in home-based elderly. When choosing a model, different 
considerations, however, such as easy operating, might in some instances lead to 
one model being prioritized over another.
77
BACKGROUND: It is important to identify older adults at high risk of functional 
disability and to take preventive measures for them at an early stage. To our 
knowledge, there are no studies that predict functional disability among 
community-dwelling older adults using machine learning algorithms.
OBJECTIVE: To construct a model that can predict functional disability over 
5 years using basic machine learning algorithms.
DESIGN: A cohort study with a mean follow-up of 5.4 years.
PARTICIPANTS: We used data from the Japan Gerontological Evaluation Study, which 
involved 73,262 people aged  ≥ 65 years who were not certified as requiring 
long-term care. The baseline survey was conducted in 2013 in 19 municipalities.
MAIN MEASURES: We defined the onset of functional disability as the new 
certification of needing long-term care that was ascertained by linking 
participants to public registries of long-term care insurance. All 183 candidate 
predictors were measured by self-report questionnaires.
KEY RESULTS: During the study period, 16,361 (22.3%) participants experienced 
the onset of functional disability. Among machine learning-based models, ridge 
regression (C statistic = 0.818) and gradient boosting (0.817) effectively 
predicted functional disability. In both models, we identified age, self-rated 
health, variables related to falls and posture stabilization, and diagnoses of 
Parkinson's disease and dementia as important features. Additionally, the ridge 
regression model identified the household characteristics such as the number of 
members, income, and receiving public assistance as important predictors, while 
the gradient boosting model selected moderate physical activity and driving. 
Based on the ridge regression model, we developed a simplified risk score for 
functional disability, and it also indicated good performance at the cut-off of 
6/7 points.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning-based models showed effective performance 
prediction over 5 years. Our findings suggest that measuring and adding the 
variables identified as important features can improve the prediction of 
functional disability.
78
Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia and is a serious health 
problem. The disease is expected to increase further in the upcoming years with 
the increase of the elderly population. Developing new treatments and diagnostic 
methods is getting more important. In this study, we focused on the early 
diagnosis of dementia in Alzheimer's disease via analysis of neuroimages. We 
analyzed the data diagnosed by the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) protocol. The analyzed data were T1-weighted magnetic resonance images of 
159 patients with Alzheimer's disease, 217 patients with mild cognitive 
impairment and 109 cognitively healthy older people. In this study, we propose 
that the volumetric reduction in the hippocampus is the most important indicator 
of Alzheimer's disease. There is not much research about the relationship 
between the volumetric reduction in the hippocampus and Alzheimer's disease. 
This volume information was calculated through semi-automatic segmentation 
software ITK-SNAP and a data set was created based on age, gender, diagnosis, 
and right and left hippocampal volume values. The diagnosis via hippocampal 
volume information was made by using machine learning techniques. By using this 
approach, we conclude that brain MRIs can be used to distinguish the patients 
with Alzheimer's Disease (AD), Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and Cognitive 
Normal (CN) from each other; while most of the studies were only able to 
distinguish AD from CN. Our results have revealed that our approach improves the 
performance of the computer-aided diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.
79
BACKGROUND: Mobility limitation in older adults is common and associated with 
poor health outcomes and loss of independence. Identification of at-risk 
individuals remains challenging because of time-consuming clinical assessments 
and limitations of statistical models for dynamic outcomes over time. Therefore, 
we aimed to develop machine learning models for predicting future mobility 
limitation in older adults using repeated measures data.
METHODS: We used annual assessments over 9 years of follow-up from the Health, 
Aging, and Body Composition study to model mobility limitation, defined as 
self-report of any difficulty walking a quarter mile or climbing 10 steps. We 
considered 46 predictors, including demographics, lifestyle, chronic conditions, 
and physical function. With a split sample approach, we developed mixed models 
(generalized linear and Binary Mixed Model forest) using (a) all 46 predictors, 
(b) a variable selection algorithm, and (c) the top 5 most important predictors. 
Age was included in all models. Performance was evaluated using area under the 
receiver operating curve in 2 internal validation data sets.
RESULTS: Area under the receiver operating curve ranged from 0.80 to 0.84 for 
the models. The most important predictors of mobility limitation were ease of 
getting up from a chair, gait speed, self-reported health status, body mass 
index, and depression.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning models using repeated measures had good 
performance for identifying older adults at risk of developing mobility 
limitation. Future studies should evaluate the utility and efficiency of the 
prediction models as a tool in clinical settings for identifying at-risk older 
adults who may benefit from interventions aimed to prevent or delay mobility 
limitation.
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
80
BACKGROUND: The importance of classifying cancer patients into high- or low-risk 
groups has led many research teams, from the biomedical and bioinformatics 
fields, to study the application of machine learning (ML) algorithms. The 
International Society of Geriatric Oncology recommends the use of the 
comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA), a multidisciplinary tool to evaluate 
health domains, for the follow-up of elderly cancer patients. However, no 
applications of ML have been proposed using CGA to classify elderly cancer 
patients.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to propose and develop predictive models, 
using ML and CGA, to estimate the risk of early death in elderly cancer 
patients.
METHODS: The ability of ML algorithms to predict early mortality in a cohort 
involving 608 elderly cancer patients was evaluated. The CGA was conducted 
during admission by a multidisciplinary team and included the following 
questionnaires: mini-mental state examination (MMSE), geriatric depression 
scale-short form, international physical activity questionnaire-short form, 
timed up and go, Katz index of independence in activities of daily living, 
Charlson comorbidity index, Karnofsky performance scale (KPS), polypharmacy, and 
mini nutritional assessment-short form (MNA-SF). The 10-fold cross-validation 
algorithm was used to evaluate all possible combinations of these questionnaires 
to estimate the risk of early death, considered when occurring within 6 months 
of diagnosis, in a variety of ML classifiers, including Naive Bayes (NB), 
decision tree algorithm J48 (J48), and multilayer perceptron (MLP). On each fold 
of evaluation, tiebreaking is handled by choosing the smallest set of 
questionnaires.
RESULTS: It was possible to select CGA questionnaire subsets with high 
predictive capacity for early death, which were either statistically similar 
(NB) or higher (J48 and MLP) when compared with the use of all questionnaires 
investigated. These results show that CGA questionnaire selection can improve 
accuracy rates and decrease the time spent to evaluate elderly cancer patients.
CONCLUSIONS: A simplified predictive model aiming to estimate the risk of early 
death in elderly cancer patients is proposed herein, minimally composed by the 
MNA-SF and KPS. We strongly recommend that these questionnaires be incorporated 
into regular geriatric assessment of older patients with cancer.
Mello, Luiz Claudio Santos Thuler, Jurema Telles Oliveira Lima. Originally 
81
BACKGROUND: Frailty is an important clinical concern for the aging population of 
people living with HIV (PLWH). The objective of this study was to identify the 
combination of risk features that distinguish frail from nonfrail individuals.
SETTING: Machine learning analysis of highly dimensional risk features was 
performed on a clinical cohort of PLWH.
METHODS: Participants included 105 older (average age = 55.6) PLWH, with at 
least a 3-month history of combination antiretroviral therapy (median CD4 = 
546). Predictors included demographics, HIV clinical markers, comorbid health 
conditions, cognition, and neuroimaging (ie, volumetrics, resting-state 
functional connectivity, and cerebral blood flow). Gradient-boosted multivariate 
regressions were implemented to establish linear and interactive classification 
models. Model performance was determined by sensitivity/specificity (F1 score) 
with 5-fold cross validation.
RESULTS: The linear gradient-boosted multivariate regression classifier included 
lower current CD4 count, lower psychomotor performance, and multiple 
neuroimaging indices (volumes, network connectivity, and blood flow) in visual 
and motor brain systems (F1 score = 71%; precision = 84%; and sensitivity = 
66%). The interactive model identified novel synergies between neuroimaging 
features, female sex, symptoms of depression, and current CD4 count.
CONCLUSIONS: Data-driven algorithms built from highly dimensional clinical and 
brain imaging features implicate disruption to the visuomotor system in older 
PLWH designated as frail individuals. Interactions between lower CD4 count, 
female sex, depressive symptoms, and neuroimaging features suggest potentiation 
of risk mechanisms. Longitudinal data-driven studies are needed to guide 
clinical strategies capable of preventing the development of frailty as PLWH 
reach advanced age.
82
INTRODUCTION: With its legalisation and regulation in Canada in 2018, the 
proportion of Canadians reporting cannabis use in 2019 increased substantially 
over the previous year, with half of new users being aged 45+ years. While use 
in older adults has been low historically, as those born in the 1950s and 1960s 
continue to age, this demographic will progressively have more liberal 
attitudes, prior cannabis exposure and higher use rates. However, older adults 
experience slower metabolism, increased likelihood of polypharmacy, cognitive 
decline and chronic physical/mental health problems. There is a need to enhance 
knowledge of the effects of cannabis use in older adults. The following question 
will be addressed using a scoping review approach: what evidence exists 
regarding beneficial and harmful effects of medical and non-medical cannabis use 
in adults >50 years of age? Given that beneficial and harmful effects of 
cannabis may be mediated by patient-level (eg, age, sex and race) and 
cannabis-related factors (eg, natural vs synthetic, consumption method), 
subgroup effects related to these and additional factors will be explored.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Methods for scoping reviews outlined by Arksey & O'Malley 
and the Joanna Briggs Institute will be used. A librarian designed a systematic 
search of the literature from database inception to June 2019. Using the OVID 
platform, Ovid MEDLINE will be searched, including Epub Ahead of Print and 
In-Process and Other Non-Indexed Citations, Embase Classic+Embase, and PsycINFO 
for reviews, randomised trials, non-randomised trials and observational studies 
of cannabis use. The Cochrane Library on Wiley will also be searched. 
Eligibility criteria will be older adult participants, currently using cannabis 
(medical or non-medical), with studies required to report a cannabis-related 
health outcome to be eligible. Two reviewers will screen citations and full 
texts, with support from artificial intelligence. Two reviewers will chart data. 
Tables/graphics will be used to map evidence and identify evidence gaps.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: This research will enhance awareness of existing 
evidence addressing the health effects of medical and non-medical cannabis use 
in older adults. Findings will be disseminated through a peer-reviewed 
publication, conference presentations and a stakeholder meeting.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/5JTAQ.
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
83
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, accounting 
for nearly 60% of all dementia cases. The occurrence of the disease has been 
increasing rapidly in recent years. Presently about 46.8 million individuals 
suffer from AD worldwide. The current absence of effective treatment to reverse 
or stop AD progression highlights the importance of disease prevention and early 
diagnosis. Brain structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has been widely 
used for AD detection as it can display morphometric differences and cerebral 
structural changes. In this study, we built three machine learning-based MRI 
data classifiers to predict AD and infer the brain regions that contribute to 
disease development and progression. We then systematically compared the three 
distinct classifiers, which were constructed based on Support Vector Machine 
(SVM), 3D Very Deep Convolutional Network (VGGNet) and 3D Deep Residual Network 
(ResNet), respectively. To improve the performance of the deep learning 
classifiers, we applied a transfer learning strategy. The weights of a 
pre-trained model were transferred and adopted as the initial weights of our 
models. Transferring the learned features significantly reduced training time 
and increased network efficiency. The classification accuracy for AD subjects 
from elderly control subjects was 90%, 95%, and 95% for the SVM, VGGNet and 
ResNet classifiers, respectively. Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping 
(Grad-CAM) was employed to show discriminative regions that contributed most to 
the AD classification by utilizing the learned spatial information of the 
3D-VGGNet and 3D-ResNet models. The resulted maps consistently highlighted 
several disease-associated brain regions, particularly the cerebellum which is a 
relatively neglected brain region in the present AD study. Overall, our 
comparisons suggested that the ResNet model provided the best classification 
performance as well as more accurate localization of disease-associated regions 
in the brain compared to the other two approaches.
84
BACKGROUND: Each year, many help seekers in need contact health helplines for 
mental support. It is crucial that they receive support immediately, and that 
waiting times are minimal. In order to minimize delay, helplines must have 
adequate staffing levels, especially during peak hours. This has raised the need 
for means to predict the call and chat volumes ahead of time accurately. 
Motivated by this, in this paper, we analyze real-life data to develop models 
for accurately forecasting call volumes, for both phone and chat conversations 
for online mental health support.
METHODS: This research was conducted on real call and chat data (adequately 
anonymized) provided by 113 Suicide Prevention (Over ons | 113 
Zelfmoordpreventie) (throughout referred to as '113'), the online helpline for 
suicide prevention in the Netherlands. Chat and phone call data were analyzed to 
better understand the important factors that influence the call arrival process. 
These factors were then used as input to several Machine Learning (ML) models to 
forecast the number of call and chat arrivals. Next to that, senior counselors 
of the helpline completed a web-based questionnaire after each shift to assess 
their perception of the workload.
RESULTS: This study has led to several remarkable and key insights. First, the 
most important factors that determine the call volumes for the helpline are the 
trend, and weekly and daily cyclic patterns (cycles), while monthly and yearly 
cycles were found to be non-significant predictors for the number of phone and 
chat conversations. Second, media events that were included in this study only 
have limited-and only short-term-impact on the call volumes. Third, so-called 
(S)ARIMA models are shown to lead to the most accurate prediction in the case of 
short-term forecasting, while simple linear models work best for long-term 
forecasting. Fourth, questionnaires filled in by senior counselors show that the 
experienced workload is mainly correlated to the number of chat conversations 
compared to phone calls.
CONCLUSION: (S)ARIMA models can best be used to forecast the number of daily 
chats and phone calls with a MAPE of less than 10 in short-term forecasting. 
These models perform better than other models showing that the number of 
arrivals depends on historical data. These forecasts can be used as support for 
planning the number of counselors needed. Furthermore, the questionnaire data 
show that the workload experienced by senior counselors is more dependent on the 
number of chat arrivals and less on the number of available agents, showing the 
value of insight into the arrival process of conversations.
85
BACKGROUND: Dementia develops as cognitive abilities deteriorate, and early 
detection is critical for effective preventive interventions. However, 
mainstream diagnostic tests and screening tools, such as CAMCOG and MMSE, often 
fail to detect dementia accurately. Various graph-based or feature-dependent 
prediction and progression models have been proposed. Whenever these models 
exploit information in the patients' Electronic Medical Records, they represent 
promising options to identify the presence and severity of dementia more 
precisely.
METHODS: The methods presented in this paper aim to address two problems related 
to dementia: (a) Basic diagnosis: identifying the presence of dementia in 
individuals, and (b) Severity diagnosis: predicting the presence of dementia, as 
well as the severity of the disease. We formulate these two tasks as 
classification problems and address them using machine learning models based on 
random forests and decision tree, analysing structured clinical data from an 
elderly population cohort. We perform a hybrid data curation strategy in which a 
dementia expert is involved to verify that curation decisions are meaningful. We 
then employ the machine learning algorithms that classify individual episodes 
into a specific dementia class. Decision trees are also used for enhancing the 
explainability of decisions made by prediction models, allowing medical experts 
to identify the most crucial patient features and their threshold values for the 
classification of dementia.
RESULTS: Our experiment results prove that baseline arithmetic or cognitive 
tests, along with demographic features, can predict dementia and its severity 
with high accuracy. In specific, our prediction models have reached an average 
f1-score of 0.93 and 0.81 for problems (a) and (b), respectively. Moreover, the 
decision trees produced for the two issues empower the interpretability of the 
prediction models.
CONCLUSIONS: This study proves that there can be an accurate estimation of the 
existence and severity of dementia disease by analysing various electronic 
medical record features and cognitive tests from the episodes of the elderly 
population. Moreover, a set of decision rules may comprise the building blocks 
for an efficient patient classification. Relevant clinical and screening test 
features (e.g. simple arithmetic or animal fluency tasks) represent precise 
predictors without calculating the scores of mainstream cognitive tests such as 
MMSE and CAMCOG. Such predictive model can identify not only meaningful 
features, but also justifications of classification. As a result, the predictive 
power of machine learning models over curated clinical data is proved, paving 
the path for a more accurate diagnosis of dementia.
86
Since the coronavirus came into existence and brought the entire world to a 
standstill, there have been drastic changes in people's lives that continue to 
affect them even as the pandemic recedes. The isolation reduced physical 
activity and hindered access to non-COVID related healthcare during lockdown and 
the ensuing months brought increased attention to mental health and the 
neurological disorders that might have been exacerbated. One nervous system 
disorder that affects the elderly and needs better awareness is Parkinson's 
disease. We have machine learning and a growing number of deep learning models 
to predict, and detect its onset; their scope is not completely exhaustive and 
can still be optimized. In this research, the authors highlight techniques that 
have been implemented in recent years for prediction of the disease. Models 
based on the less redundantly used classifiers-naive Bayes, logistic regression, 
linear-support vector machine, kernelizing support vector machine, and 
multilayer perceptron-are initially implemented and compared. Based on 
limitations of the results, an ensemble stack model of hyper-tuned versions 
using GridSearchCV out of the top performing supervised classifiers along-with 
extreme gradient boosting classifier is implemented to further improve overall 
results. In addition, a convolutional neural network-based model is also 
implemented, and the results are analyzed using two epoch values to compare the 
performance of deep learning models. The benchmark datasets-UCI Parkinson's data 
and the spiral and wave datasets-have been used for machine and deep learning 
respectively. Performance metrics like accuracy, precision, recall, support, and 
F1 score are utilized, and confusion matrices and graphs are plotted for 
visualization. 94.87% accuracy was achieved using the stacking approach.
87
Previous research has shown the benefits of early detection and treatment of 
dementia. This detection is usually performed manually by one or more clinicians 
based on reports and psychometric testing. Machine learning algorithms provide 
an alternative method of prediction that may contribute, with an automated 
process and insights, to the diagnosis and classification of the severity level 
of dementia. The aim of this study is to explore the use of neuropsychological 
data from a reduced version of the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination III 
(ACE-III) to predict absence or different levels of dementia severity using the 
Global Deterioration Scale (GDS) scores through the implementation of the kNN 
machine learning algorithm. A sample of 1164 elderly people over sixty years old 
were evaluated using a reduced version of the ACE-III and the GDS. The kNN 
classifier provided good accuracies using 15 items from the ACE-III and 
adequately differentiating people with absence and mild impairment, from those 
with more severe levels of impairment according to the GDS rating. Our results 
suggest that the kNN algorithm may be used to automate aspects of clinical 
cognitive impairment classification in the elderly population.
88
BACKGROUND: The status of melancholia as a categorical or dimensional condition 
remains unclear, and no measure of melancholia has achieved definitive status. 
This study aimed to use a machine learning approach to assess whether a 
pre-established cut-off score on the Sydney Melancholia Prototype Index (SMPI) 
provided clear differentiation of melancholic/non-melancholic depression, and to 
identify the items making the most distinct contribution.
METHODS: We analysed amalgamated data sets of 1513 clinically depressed patients 
assessed via the clinician-rated version of the SMPI (SMPI-CR). We also 
evaluated the self-report version of the SMPI (SMPI-SR) in a combined 
clinical/community sample of 2025 depressed patients and senior high school 
students. Rule ensembles were derived in which the outcome measure was the 
presence/absence of melancholia (defined as scoring at or above a SMPI cut-off 
score that had been established in previous studies) and the predictive 
variables were the individual SMPI items.
RESULTS: The pre-established SMPI cut-off score was confirmed as differentiating 
melancholic/non-melancholic with near perfect accuracy for the SMPI-CR, and with 
very high accuracy for the SMPI-SR. The relative importance of all SMPI items 
was quantified.
LIMITATIONS: It is difficult to validate SMPI-assigned diagnoses due to the lack 
of any similar measures.
CONCLUSIONS: The SMPI-CR was confirmed to be a highly precise instrument for 
differentiating melancholic and non-melancholic depression. Its use will advance 
clinical decision making and studies evaluating causes, mechanisms and 
treatments for the two depressive sub-types, as well as assist clarification as 
to whether melancholia is categorically or dimensionally distinct from 
non-melancholic depression.
89
Depression (DEP) and dementia of the Alzheimer's type (DAT) represent the most 
common neuropsychiatric disorders in elderly patients. Accurate differential 
diagnosis is indispensable to ensure appropriate treatment. However, DEP can yet 
mimic cognitive symptoms of DAT and patients with DAT often also present with 
depressive symptoms, impeding correct diagnosis. Machine learning (ML) 
approaches could eventually improve this discrimination using neuropsychological 
test data, but evidence is still missing. We therefore employed Support Vector 
Machine (SVM), Naïve Bayes (NB), Random Forest (RF) and conventional Logistic 
Regression (LR) to retrospectively predict the diagnoses of 189 elderly patients 
(68 DEP and 121 DAT) based on either the well-established Consortium to 
Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease neuropsychological assessment 
battery (CERAD-NAB) or a flexible battery approach (FLEXBAT). The best 
performing combination consisted of FLEXBAT and NB, correctly classifying 87.0% 
of patients as either DAT or DEP. However, all accuracies were similar across 
algorithms and test batteries (83.0% - 87.0%). Accordingly, our study is the 
first to show that common ML algorithms with their default parameters can 
accurately differentiate between patients clinically diagnosed with DAT or DEP 
using neuropsychological test data, but do not necessarily outperform 
conventional LR.
90
OBJECTIVE: Despite efforts to identify characteristics associated with 
medication-placebo differences in antidepressant trials, few consistent findings 
have emerged to guide participant selection in drug development settings and 
differential therapeutics in clinical practice. Limitations in the methodologies 
used, particularly searching for a single moderator while treating all other 
variables as noise, may partially explain the failure to generate consistent 
results. The present study tested whether interactions between pretreatment 
patient characteristics, rather than a single-variable solution, may better 
predict who is most likely to benefit from placebo versus medication.
METHODS: Data were analyzed from 174 patients aged 75 years and older with 
unipolar depression who were randomly assigned to citalopram or placebo. 
Model-based recursive partitioning analysis was conducted to identify the most 
robust significant moderators of placebo versus citalopram response.
RESULTS: The greatest signal detection between medication and placebo in favor 
of medication was among patients with fewer years of education (≤12) who 
suffered from a longer duration of depression since their first episode (>3.47 
years) (B = 2.53, t(32) = 3.01, p = 0.004). Compared with medication, placebo 
had the greatest response for those who were more educated (>12 years), to the 
point where placebo almost outperformed medication (B = -0.57, t(96) = -1.90, 
p = 0.06).
CONCLUSION: Machine learning approaches capable of evaluating the contributions 
of multiple predictor variables may be a promising methodology for identifying 
placebo versus medication responders. Duration of depression and education 
should be considered in the efforts to modulate placebo magnitude in drug 
development settings and in clinical practice.
91
Dementia is a neurological condition that primarily affects older adults and 
there is still no cure or therapy available to cure it. The symptoms of dementia 
can appear as early as 10 years before the beginning of actual diagnosed 
dementia. Hence, machine learning (ML) researchers have presented several 
methods for early detection of dementia based on symptoms. However, these 
techniques suffer from two major flaws. The first issue is the bias of ML models 
caused by imbalanced classes in the dataset. Past research did not address this 
issue well and did not take preventative precautions. Different ML models were 
developed to illustrate this bias. To alleviate the problem of bias, we deployed 
a synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) to balance the training 
process of the proposed ML model. The second issue is the poor classification 
accuracy of ML models, which leads to a limited clinical significance. To 
improve dementia prediction accuracy, we proposed an intelligent learning system 
that is a hybrid of an autoencoder and adaptive boost model. The autoencoder is 
used to extract relevant features from the feature space and the Adaboost model 
is deployed for the classification of dementia by using an extracted subset of 
features. The hyperparameters of the Adaboost model are fine-tuned using a grid 
search algorithm. Experimental findings reveal that the suggested learning 
system outperforms eleven similar systems which were proposed in the literature. 
Furthermore, it was also observed that the proposed learning system improves the 
strength of the conventional Adaboost model by 9.8% and reduces its time 
complexity. Lastly, the proposed learning system achieved classification 
accuracy of 90.23%, sensitivity of 98.00% and specificity of 96.65%.
92
BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Despite a high prevalence and association with poor 
outcomes, screening to identify cognitive impairment (CI) in the emergency 
department (ED) is uncommon. Identification of high-risk subsets of older adults 
is a critical challenge to expanding screening programs. We developed and 
evaluated an automated screening tool to identify a subset of patients at high 
risk for CI.
METHODS: In this secondary analysis of existing data collected for a randomized 
control trial, we developed machine-learning models to identify patients at 
higher risk of CI using only variables available in electronic health record 
(EHR). We used records from 1736 community-dwelling adults age > 59 being 
discharged from three EDs. Potential CI was determined based on the Blessed 
Orientation Memory Concentration (BOMC) test, administered in the ED. A nested 
cross-validation framework was used to evaluate machine-learning algorithms, 
comparing area under the receiver-operator curve (AUC) as the primary metric of 
performance.
RESULTS: Based on BOMC scores, 121 of 1736 (7%) participants screened positive 
for potential CI at the time of their ED visit. The best performing algorithm, 
an XGBoost model, predicted BOMC positivity with an AUC of 0.72. With a 
classification threshold of 0.4, this model had a sensitivity of 0.73, a 
specificity of 0.64, a negative predictive value of 0.97, and a positive 
predictive value of 0.13. In a hypothetical ED with 200 older adult visits per 
week, the use of this model would lead to a decrease in the in-person screening 
burden from 200 to 77 individuals in order to detect 10 of 14 patients who would 
fail a BOMC.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that an algorithm based on EHR data can 
define a subset of patients at higher risk for CI. Incorporating such an 
algorithm into a screening workflow could allow screening efforts and resources 
to be focused where they have the most impact.
93
INTRODUCTION: People with dementia (PWD) often become disoriented, which 
increases their risk of getting lost. This article explores the extent to which 
we can predict future whereabouts of PWD by learning from their past mobility 
patterns using Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking devices.
METHODS: Seven older adults with dementia and eight healthy older adults 
completed 8 weeks of GPS data collection. We computed the probability that an 
appropriate algorithm can correctly predict the participant's future 
destinations using spatial and temporal patterns in each participant's GPS 
trajectories.
RESULTS: Relying on both spatial and temporal patterns, our results suggest that 
a 4-week record of mobility patterns displays 95% potential predictability 
across the dementia group, which is significantly higher than 92% potential 
predictability among the controls, t(13) = -3.39, P < .01, d = -1.75. That is, 
we can hope to be able to predict destinations of PWD about 95% of the time and 
destinations of controls about 92% of the time.
DISCUSSIONS: Our findings on predictability of mobility patterns among PWD offer 
new perspectives on predictive mobility models that can be used to locate 
missing persons with dementia.
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
94
This study explored the use of unsupervised machine learning to identify 
subgroups of patients with heart failure who used telehealth services in the 
home health setting, and examined intercluster differences for patient 
characteristics related to medical history, symptoms, medications, psychosocial 
assessments, and healthcare utilization. Using a feature selection algorithm, we 
selected seven variables from 557 patients for clustering. We tested three 
clustering techniques: hierarchical, k-means, and partitioning around medoids. 
Hierarchical clustering was identified as the best technique using internal 
validation methods. Intercluster differences among patient characteristics and 
outcomes were assessed with either χ test or one-way analysis of variance. 
Ranging in size from 153 to 233 patients, three clusters displayed patterns that 
differed significantly (P < .05) in patient characteristics of age, sex, medical 
history of comorbid conditions, use of beta blockers, and quality of life 
assessment. Significant (P < .001) intercluster differences in number of 
medications, comorbidities, and healthcare utilization were also revealed. The 
study identified patterns of association between (1) mental health status, 
pulmonary disorders, and obesity, and (2) healthcare utilization for patients 
with heart failure who used telehealth in the home health setting. Study results 
also revealed a lack of prescription guideline-recommended heart failure 
medications for the subgroup with the highest proportion of older female adults.
95
BACKGROUND: Vascular risk factors like white matter lesions (WMLs) are 
increasingly recognized as risk factors for vascular dementia (VaD) and can 
predict Alzheimer's disease (AD) at least a decade before the clinical stage of 
the disease. This study aimed to predict cognitive decline and use machine 
learning techniques to classify older individuals (aged 50 years or older) with 
WMLs as having vascular mild cognitive impairment (VaMCI), VaD, or in good 
cognitive health (CH).
METHODS: A total of 79 individuals with WMLs were selected for this study and 
categorized into the following 3 groups: CH (n=25), VaMCI (n=33), and VaD 
(n=21). Data from the entire cohort was then divided into a training dataset 
(n=56) and testing dataset (n=23). The data were extracted from gray matter (GM) 
segmentations using voxel-based morphometry (VBM). A relevance vector regression 
(RVR) approach was used to test the relationship between the structural brain 
images and clinical scores. To predict the individual-level subtypes, we applied 
2 different machine learning-based classifiers: support vector machine (SVM) and 
Gaussian process classification (GPC). All predictive models were trained on the 
training dataset and then validated on the testing dataset of age-matched 
participants.
RESULTS: Multi-domain cognitive performance could be predicted based on the 
pattern of GM atrophy in older people with WMLs using a RVR approach. The 
classification of VaD versus CH (cross-validation accuracy =93.94%, test set 
accuracy =76.92%) and VaMCI versus CH (cross-validation accuracy =95.24%, test 
set accuracy =87.50%) could be successfully achieved using both SVM and GPC. 
However, SVM (cross-validation accuracy =67.57%, test set accuracy =70.59%) 
performed better than GPC in the classification of VaD versus VaMCI.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the patterns of gray matter and RVR-based model could 
achieve prediction of cognitive test scores, and SVM and GPC could classify the 
severity of cognitive impairment in older people with WMLs.
2022 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.
96
BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Metastatic spinal disease is an advanced stage of cancer 
patients and often suffer from terrible psychological health status; however, 
the ability to estimate the risk probability of this adverse outcome using 
current available data is very limited.
PURPOSE: The goal of this study was to propose a precise model based on machine 
learning techniques to predict psychological status among cancer patients with 
spinal metastatic disease.
STUDY DESIGN/SETTING: A prospective cohort study.
PATIENT SAMPLE: A total of 1043 cancer patients with spinal metastatic disease 
were included.
OUTCOME MEASURES: The main outcome was severe psychological distress.
METHODS: The total of patients was randomly divided into a training dataset and 
a testing dataset on a ratio of 9:1. Patients' demographics, lifestyle choices, 
cancer-related features, clinical manifestations, and treatments were collected 
as potential model predictors in the study. Five machine learning algorithms, 
including XGBoosting machine, random forest, gradient boosting machine, support 
vector machine, and ensemble prediction model, as well as a logistic regression 
model were employed to train and optimize models in the training set, and their 
predictive performance was assessed in the testing set.
RESULTS: Up to 21.48% of all patients who were recruited had severe 
psychological distress. Elderly patients (p<0.001), female (p =0.045), current 
smoking (p=0.002) or drinking (p=0.003), a lower level of education (p<0.001), a 
stronger spiritual desire (p<0.001), visceral metastasis (p=0.005), and a higher 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score (p<0.001) were significantly 
associated with worse psychological health. With an area under the curve (AUC) 
of 0.865 (95% CI: 0.788-0.941) and an accuracy of up to 0.843, the gradient 
boosting machine algorithm performed best in the prediction of the outcome, 
followed by the XGBooting machine algorithm (AUC: 0.851, 95% CI: 0.768-0.934; 
Accuracy: 0.826) and ensemble prediction (AUC: 0.851, 95% CI: 0.770-0.932; 
Accuracy: 0.809) in the testing set. In contrast, the AUC of the logistic 
regression model was only 0.836 (95% CI: 0.756-0.916; Accuracy: 0.783).
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning models have greater predictive power and can offer 
useful tools to identify individuals with spinal metastatic disease who are 
experiencing severe psychological distress.
97
BACKGROUND: Structured Medication Reviews (SMRs) are intended to help deliver 
the NHS Long Term Plan for medicines optimisation in people living with multiple 
long-term conditions and polypharmacy. It is challenging to gather the 
information needed for these reviews due to poor integration of health records 
across providers and there is little guidance on how to identify those patients 
most urgently requiring review.
OBJECTIVE: To extract information from scattered clinical records on how health 
and medications change over time, apply interpretable artificial intelligence 
(AI) approaches to predict risks of poor outcomes and overlay this information 
on care records to inform SMRs. We will pilot this approach in primary care 
prescribing audit and feedback systems, and co-design future medicines 
optimisation decision support systems.
DESIGN: DynAIRx will target potentially problematic polypharmacy in three key 
multimorbidity groups, namely, people with (a) mental and physical health 
problems, (b) four or more long-term conditions taking ten or more drugs and (c) 
older age and frailty. Structured clinical data will be drawn from integrated 
care records (general practice, hospital, and social care) covering an ∼11m 
population supplemented with Natural Language Processing (NLP) of unstructured 
clinical text. AI systems will be trained to identify patterns of conditions, 
medications, tests, and clinical contacts preceding adverse events in order to 
identify individuals who might benefit most from an SMR.
DISCUSSION: By implementing and evaluating an AI-augmented visualisation of care 
records in an existing prescribing audit and feedback system we will create a 
learning system for medicines optimisation, co-designed throughout with 
end-users and patients.
98
INTRODUCTION: Accurate estimation of dementia prevalence is essential for making 
effective public and social care policy to support individuals and families 
suffering from the disease. The purpose of this paper is to estimate the 
prevalence of dementia in India using a semi-supervised machine learning 
approach based on a large nationally representative sample.
METHODS: The sample of this study is adults 60 years or older in the wave 1 
(2017-2019) of the Longitudinal Aging Study in India (LASI). A subsample in LASI 
received extensive cognitive assessment and clinical consensus ratings and 
therefore has diagnoses of dementia. A semi-supervised machine learning model 
was developed to predict the status of dementia for LASI participants without 
diagnoses. After obtaining the predictions, sampling weights and age 
standardization to the World Health Organization (WHO) standard population were 
applied to generate the estimate for prevalence of dementia in India.
RESULTS: The prevalence of dementia for those aged 60 years and older in India 
was 8.44% (95% CI: 7.89%-9.01%). The age-standardized prevalence was estimated 
to be 8.94% (95% CI: 8.36%-9.55%). The prevalence of dementia was greater for 
those who were older, were females, received no education, and lived in rural 
areas.
DISCUSSION: The prevalence of dementia in India may be higher than prior 
estimates derived from local studies. These prevalence estimates provide the 
information necessary for making long-term planning of public and social care 
policy. The semi-supervised machine learning approach adopted in this paper may 
also be useful for other large population aging studies that have a similar data 
structure.
99
INTRODUCTION: Depressive disorder is one of the major public health problems 
among the elderly. An effective depression risk prediction model can provide 
insights on the disease progression and potentially inform timely targeted 
interventions. Therefore, research on predicting the onset of depressive 
disorder for elderly adults considering the sequential progression patterns is 
critically needed.
OBJECTIVE: This research aims to develop a state-of-the-art deep learning model 
for the individualized prediction of depressive disorder with a 22-year 
longitudinal survey data among elderly people in the United States.
METHODS: We obtain the 22-year longitudinal survey data from the University of 
Michigan Health and Retirement Study, which consists of information on 20,000 
elderly people in the United States from 1992 to 2014. To capture temporal and 
high-order interactions among risk factors, the proposed deep learning model 
utilizes a recurrent neural network framework with a multitask structure. The 
C-statistic and the mean absolute error are used to evaluate the prediction 
accuracy of the proposed model and a set of baseline models.
RESULTS: The experiments with the 22-year longitudinal survey data indicate that 
(a) machine learning models can provide an accurate prediction of the onset of 
depressive disorder for elderly individuals; (b) the temporal patterns of risk 
factors are associated with the onset of depressive disorder; and (c) the 
proposed multitask deep learning model exhibits superior performance as compared 
with baseline models.
CONCLUSION: The results demonstrate the capability of deep learning-based 
prediction models in capturing temporal and high-order interactions among risk 
factors, which are usually ignored by traditional regression models. This 
research sheds light on the use of machine learning models to predict the onset 
of depressive disorder among elderly people. Practically, the proposed methods 
can be implemented as a decision support system to help clinicians make 
decisions and inform actionable intervention strategies for elderly people.
100
BACKGROUND: Diagnostic assessment of ASD requires substantial clinical 
experience and is particularly difficult in the context of other disorders with 
behavioral symptoms in the domain of social interaction and communication. 
Observation measures such as the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) 
do not take into account such co-occurring disorders.
METHOD: We used a well-characterized clinical sample of individuals (n = 1,251) 
that had received detailed outpatient evaluation for the presence of an ASD 
diagnosis (n = 481) and covered a range of additional overlapping diagnoses, 
including anxiety-related disorders (ANX, n = 122), ADHD (n = 439), and conduct 
disorder (CD, n = 194). We focused on ADOS module 3, covering the age range with 
particular high prevalence of such differential diagnoses. We used machine 
learning (ML) and trained random forest models on ADOS single item scores to 
predict a clinical best-estimate diagnosis of ASD in the context of these 
differential diagnoses (ASD vs. ANX, ASD vs. ADHD, ASD vs. CD), in the context 
of co-occurring ADHD, and an unspecific model using all available data. We 
employed nested cross-validation for an unbiased estimate of classification 
performance and made available a Webapp to showcase the results and feasibility 
for translation into clinical practice.
RESULTS: We obtained very good overall sensitivity (0.89-0.94) and specificity 
(0.87-0.89). In particular for individuals with less severe symptoms, our models 
showed increases of up to 35% in sensitivity or specificity. Furthermore, we 
analyzed item importance profiles of the ANX, ADHD, and CD models in comparison 
with the unspecific model revealing distinct patterns of importance for specific 
ADOS items with respect to differential diagnoses.
CONCLUSIONS: ML-based diagnostic classification may improve clinical decisions 
by utilizing the full range of information from detailed diagnostic observation 
instruments such as the ADOS. Importantly, this strategy might be of particular 
relevance for older children with less severe symptoms for whom the diagnostic 
decision is often particularly difficult.
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for Child and Adolescent Mental 
101
Erratum in
102
BACKGROUND: In the older general population, neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) 
103
Depression is one of the most common mental health problems in middle-aged and 
elderly people. The establishment of risk factor-based depression risk 
assessment model is conducive to early detection and early treatment of 
high-risk groups of depression. Five machine learning models (logistic 
regression (LR); back propagation (BP); random forest (RF); support vector 
machines (SVM); category boosting (CatBoost) were used to evaluate the 
depression among 8374 middle-aged people and 4636 elderly people in the NHANES 
database from 2011 to 2018. In the 2011-2018 cycle, the estimated prevalence of 
depression was 8.97% in the middle-aged participants and 8.02% in the elderly 
participants. Among the middle-aged and elderly participants, CatBoost was the 
best model to identify depression, and its area under the working characteristic 
curve (AUC) reaches the highest. The second is LR model and SVM model, while the 
performance of BP and RF model was slightly worse. The primary influencing 
factor of depression in middle-aged male is alanine aminotransferase. All five 
machine learning models can identify the occurrence of depression in the NHANES 
data set through social demographics, lifestyle, laboratory data and other data 
of middle-aged and elderly people, and among five models, the CatBoost model 
performed best.
104
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is an early stage of dementia, which may lead to 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) in older adults. Therefore, early detection of MCI and 
implementation of treatment and intervention can effectively slow down or even 
inhibit the progression of the disease, thus minimizing the risk of AD. 
Currently, we know that published work relies on an analysis of awake EEG 
recordings. However, recent studies have suggested that changes in the structure 
of sleep may lead to cognitive decline. In this work, we propose a sleep 
EEG-based method for MCI detection, extracting specific features of sleep to 
characterize neuroregulatory deficit emergent with MCI. This study analyzed the 
EEGs of 40 subjects (20 MCI, 20 HC) with the developed algorithm. We extracted 
sleep slow waves and spindles features, combined with spectral and complexity 
features from sleep EEG, and used the SVM classifier and GRU network to identify 
MCI. In addition, the classification results of different feature sets 
(including with sleep features from sleep EEG and without sleep features from 
awake EEG) and different classification methods were evaluated. Finally, the MCI 
classification accuracy of the GRU network based on features extracted from 
sleep EEG was the highest, reaching 93.46%. Experimental results show that 
compared with the awake EEG, sleep EEG can provide more useful information to 
distinguish between MCI and HC. This method can not only improve the 
classification performance but also facilitate the early intervention of AD.
105
BACKGROUND: There are limited data on the use of artificial intelligence methods 
for the diagnosis of dementia in epidemiological studies in low- and 
middle-income country (LMIC) settings. A culture and education fair battery of 
cognitive tests was developed and validated for population based studies in low- 
and middle-income countries including India by the 10/66 Dementia Research 
Group.
AIMS: We explored the machine learning methods based on the 10/66 battery of 
cognitive tests for the diagnosis of dementia based in a birth cohort study in 
South India.
METHODS: The data sets for 466 men and women for this study were obtained from 
the on-going Mysore Studies of Natal effect of Health and Ageing (MYNAH), in 
south India. The data sets included: demographics, performance on the 10/66 
cognitive function tests, the 10/66 diagnosis of mental disorders and population 
based normative data for the 10/66 battery of cognitive function tests. 
Diagnosis of dementia from the rule based approach was compared against the 
10/66 diagnosis of dementia. We have applied machine learning techniques to 
identify minimal number of the 10/66 cognitive function tests required for 
diagnosing dementia and derived an algorithm to improve the accuracy of dementia 
diagnosis.
RESULTS: Of 466 subjects, 27 had 10/66 diagnosis of dementia, 19 of whom were 
correctly identified as having dementia by Jrip classification with 100% 
accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot exploratory study indicates that machine learning 
methods can help identify community dwelling older adults with 10/66 criterion 
diagnosis of dementia with good accuracy in a LMIC setting such as India. This 
should reduce the duration of the diagnostic assessment and make the process 
easier and quicker for clinicians, patients and will be useful for 'case' 
ascertainment in population based epidemiological studies.
106
INTRODUCTION: Down syndrome (DS) is associated with elevated risk for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) due to amyloid beta (Aβ) lifelong accumulation. We 
hypothesized that the spatial distribution of brain Aβ predicts future dementia 
conversion in individuals with DS.
METHODS: We acquired 18F-florbetapir positron emission tomography scans from 19 
nondemented individuals with DS at baseline and monitored them for 4 years, with 
five individuals transitioning to dementia. Machine learning classification 
using an independent test set determined features on 18F-florbetapir 
standardized uptake value ratio maps that predicted transition.
RESULTS: In addition to "AD signature" regions including the inferior parietal 
cortex, temporal lobes, and the cingulum, we found that Aβ cortical binding in 
the prefrontal and superior frontal cortices distinguished subjects who 
transitioned to dementia. Classification did well in predicting transitioners.
DISCUSSION: Our study suggests that specific regional profiles of brain amyloid 
in older adults with DS may predict cognitive decline and are informative in 
evaluating the risk for dementia.
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
107
AIM: Understanding the differential mental health effects of traumatic 
experiences is important to identify particularly vulnerable subpopulations. We 
examined the heterogeneous associations between disaster-related traumatic 
experiences and postdisaster mental health, using a novel machine learning-based 
causal inference approach.
METHODS: Data were from a prospective cohort study of Japanese older adults in 
an area severely affected by the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake. The baseline 
survey was conducted 7 months before the disaster and the 2 follow-up surveys 
were conducted 2.5 and 5.5 years after (n = 1150 to n = 1644 depending on the 
exposure-outcome combinations). As disaster-related traumatic experiences, we 
assessed complete home loss and loss of loved ones. Using the generalized random 
forest algorithm, we estimated conditional average treatment effects (CATEs) of 
the disaster damages on postdisaster mental health outcomes to examine the 
heterogeneous associations by 51 predisaster characteristics of the individuals.
RESULTS: We found that, even when there was no population average association 
between disaster-related trauma and subsequent mental health outcomes, some 
subgroups experienced severe impacts. We also identified and compared 
characteristics of the most and least vulnerable groups (ie, top versus bottom 
deciles of the estimated CATEs). While there were some unique patterns specific 
to each exposure-outcome combination, the most vulnerable group tended to be 
from lower socioeconomic backgrounds with preexisting depressive symptoms for 
many exposure-outcome combinations.
CONCLUSIONS: We found considerable heterogeneity in the association between 
disaster-related traumatic experiences and subsequent mental health problems.
of Psychiatry and Neurology.
108
BACKGROUND: Depression is currently underdiagnosed among older adults. As part 
of the Novel Assessment of Nutrition and Aging (NANA) validation study, 40 older 
adults self-reported their mood using a touchscreen computer over three, 
one-week periods. Here, we demonstrate the potential of these data to predict 
future depression status.
METHODS: We analysed data from the NANA validation study using a machine 
learning approach. We applied the least absolute shrinkage and selection 
operator with a logistic model to averages of six measures of mood, with 
depression status according to the Geriatric Depression Scale 10 weeks later as 
the outcome variable. We tested multiple values of the selection parameter in 
order to produce a model with low deviance. We used a cross-validation framework 
to avoid overspecialisation, and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve 
analysis to determine the quality of the fitted model.
RESULTS: The model we report contained coefficients for two variables: sadness 
and tiredness, as well as a constant. The cross-validated area under the ROC 
curve for this model was 0.88 (CI: 0.69-0.97).
LIMITATIONS: While results are based on a small sample, the methodology for the 
selection of variables appears suitable for the problem at hand, suggesting 
promise for a wider study and ultimate deployment with older adults at increased 
risk of depression.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified self-reported scales of sadness and tiredness as 
sensitive measures which have the potential to predict future depression status 
in older adults, partially addressing the problem of underdiagnosis.
109
Objective: This study aimed to analyze the factors affecting depression among 
South Korean middle-aged and older adults using data from the Korean 
Longitudinal Study of Aging. Methods: We analyzed data regarding demographic 
characteristics, lifestyle, quality of life, cognitive level, and depression. 
Cognitive level and depression were evaluated using the Korean-Mini-Mental 
Status Examination and Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale, 
respectively. Results: Depression was correlated with age, gender, residential 
area, level of education, alcohol intake, regular exercise, life satisfaction, 
and cognitive level, but not smoking. Furthermore, depression was highly 
affected by age, residential area, regular exercise, life satisfaction, and 
cognitive level, with a prediction accuracy of 80.26% achieved through machine 
learning analysis. Conclusions: Various factors are associated with depression 
in middle-aged and older adults. Therefore, multifaceted interventions for 
preventing depression in these age groups are required.
110
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease that causes 
complications with thinking capability, memory and behavior. AD is a major 
public health problem among the elderly in developed and developing countries. 
With the growth of AD around the world, there is a need to further expand our 
understanding of the roles different clinical measurements can have in the 
diagnosis of AD. In this work, we propose a machine learning-based technique to 
distinguish control subjects with no cognitive impairments, AD subjects, and 
subjects with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), often seen as precursors of AD. 
We utilized several machine learning (ML) techniques and found that Gradient 
Boosting Decision Trees achieved the highest performance above 84% 
classification accuracy. Also, we determined the importance of the features 
(clinical biomarkers) contributing to the proposed multi-class classification 
system. Further investigation on the biomarkers will pave the way to introduce 
better treatment plan for AD patients.
111
Background: Elderly patients undergoing hip fracture repair surgery are at 
increased risk of delirium due to aging, comorbidities, and frailty. But current 
methods for identifying the high risk of delirium among hospitalized patients 
have moderate accuracy and require extra questionnaires. Artificial intelligence 
makes it possible to establish machine learning models that predict incident 
delirium risk based on electronic health data. Methods: We conducted a 
retrospective case-control study on elderly patients (≥65 years of age) who 
received orthopedic repair with hip fracture under spinal or general anesthesia 
between June 1, 2018, and May 31, 2019. Anesthesia records and medical charts 
were reviewed to collect demographic, surgical, anesthetic features, and frailty 
index to explore potential risk factors for postoperative delirium. Delirium was 
assessed by trained nurses using the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) every 12 
h during the hospital stay. Four machine learning risk models were constructed 
to predict the incidence of postoperative delirium: random forest, eXtreme 
Gradient Boosting (XGBoosting), support vector machine (SVM), and multilayer 
perception (MLP). K-fold cross-validation was deployed to accomplish internal 
validation and performance evaluation. Results: About 245 patients were included 
and postoperative delirium affected 12.2% (30/245) of the patients. Multiple 
logistic regression revealed that dementia/history of stroke [OR 3.063, 95% CI 
(1.231, 7.624)], blood transfusion [OR 2.631, 95% CI (1.055, 6.559)], and 
preparation time [OR 1.476, 95% CI (1.170, 1.862)] were associated with 
postoperative delirium, achieving an area under receiver operating curve (AUC) 
of 0.779, 95% CI (0.703, 0.856). The accuracy of machine learning models for 
predicting the occurrence of postoperative delirium ranged from 83.67 to 87.75%. 
Machine learning methods detected 16 risk factors contributing to the 
development of delirium. Preparation time, frailty index uses of vasopressors 
during the surgery, dementia/history of stroke, duration of surgery, and 
anesthesia were the six most important risk factors of delirium. Conclusion: 
Electronic chart-derived machine learning models could generate 
hospital-specific delirium prediction models and calculate the contribution of 
risk factors to the occurrence of delirium. Further research is needed to 
evaluate the significance and applicability of electronic chart-derived machine 
learning models for the detection risk of delirium in elderly patients 
undergoing hip fracture repair surgeries.
112
The method is providing and overview of the organization in the management 
perspective, within the health big data analysis, especially for the elderly 
employees, the organizations could sign the elderly employees within the right 
tasks, it reducing the costs by increasing the employees' job performance and 
organization performance. By addressing the importance role of big health data 
analytics (BDHA) in the healthcare system .moreover BDHA enables a patient's 
medical records to be searched in a dynamic, interactive manner. One billion 
records were made in two hours. Current clinical reporting compares large health 
data profiles and meta-big health data, giving health apps basic interfaces. A 
combination of Hadoop/MapReduce and HBase was used to generate the necessary 
hospital-specific large heath data. One billion (10TB) and three billion (30TB) 
HBase large health data files might be created in a week or a month using the 
concept. Apache Hadoop technologies tested simulated medical records. 
Inconsistencies reduced big health data. An encounter-centered big health 
database was difficult to set up due to the complicated medical system 
connections between big health data profiles. Associated with job performance 
such as the gender, current/past job positions and the health conditions are 
important. For genders the 66.36% of respondents in the experiments are females, 
33.64 are males, majority of are healthy which are 66.97%, 30.58% are common 
geriatric disease, rest 2.45% are suffering from occupational disease; In terms 
of the current/past job positions, 20% of the respondents are working as 
accountant, followed by sales and management level. The Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual, lists 157 distinct illnesses. Individuals may be diagnosed 
with one or more illnesses as a consequence of medical health professionals 
watching and analyzing their symptoms. It has been discovered that mental health 
issues have a negative impact on employees' job performance. For example, 
research on individuals with anxiety and depression has a direct impact on 
concentrations, decision-making process, and risk-taking behavior, which can be 
determined for job performance. Machine learning focuses on approaches that can 
be used to create accurate predictions about future characteristics based on 
previous training and post training. Principles such as job task and 
computational learning are crucial for machine learning algorithms that use a 
large amount of big health data.
LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023, Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a 
113
This secondary data analysis study aimed to (1) investigate the use of two 
sense-based parameters (movement and sleep hours) as predictors of chronic pain 
when controlling for patient demographics and depression, and (2) identify a 
classification model with accuracy in predicting chronic pain. Data collected by 
Oregon Health & Science University between March 2018 and December 2019 under 
the Collaborative Aging Research Using Technology Initiative were analyzed in 
two stages. Data were collected by sensor technologies and questionnaires from 
older adults living independently or with a partner in the community. In Stage 
1, regression models were employed to determine unique sensor-based behavioral 
predictors of pain. These sensor-based parameters were used to create a 
classification model to predict the weekly recalled pain intensity and 
interference level using a deep neural network model, a machine learning 
approach, in Stage 2. Daily step count was a unique predictor for both pain 
intensity (75% Accuracy, F1 = 0.58) and pain interference (82% Accuracy, 
F1 = 0.59). The developed classification model performed well in this dataset 
with acceptable accuracy scores. This study demonstrated that machine learning 
technique can be used to identify the relationship between patients' pain and 
the risk factors.
114
INTRODUCTION: Reliable models to predict amyloid beta (Aβ) positivity in the 
general aging population are lacking but could become cost-efficient tools to 
identify individuals at risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
METHODS: We developed Aβ prediction models in the clinical Anti-Amyloid 
Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer's (A4) Study (n = 4,119) including a broad 
range of easily ascertainable predictors (demographics, cognition and daily 
functioning, health and lifestyle factors). Importantly, we determined the 
generalizability of our models in the population-based Rotterdam Study 
(n = 500).
RESULTS: The best performing model in the A4 Study (area under the curve 
[AUC] = 0.73 [0.69-0.76]), including age, apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 genotype, 
family history of dementia, and subjective and objective measures of cognition, 
walking duration and sleep behavior, was validated in the independent Rotterdam 
Study with higher accuracy (AUC = 0.85 [0.81-0.89]). Yet, the improvement 
relative to a model including only age and APOE ε4 was marginal.
DISCUSSION: Aβ prediction models including inexpensive and non-invasive measures 
were successfully applied to a general population-derived sample more 
representative of typical older non-demented adults.
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.
115
INTRODUCTION: Reducing the amount of testing required to accurately detect 
cognitive impairment is clinically relevant. The aim of this research was to 
determine the fewest number of clinical measures required to accurately classify 
participants as healthy older adult, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), or 
dementia using a suite of classification techniques.
METHOD: Two variable selection machine learning models (i.e., naive Bayes, 
decision tree), a logistic regression, and two participant datasets (i.e., 
clinical diagnosis; Clinical Dementia Rating, CDR) were explored. Participants 
classified using clinical diagnosis criteria included 52 individuals with 
dementia, 97 with MCI, and 161 cognitively healthy older adults. Participants 
classified using CDR included 154 individuals with CDR = 0, 93 individuals with 
CDR = 0.5, and 25 individuals with CDR = 1.0+. A total of 27 demographic, 
psychological, and neuropsychological variables were available for variable 
selection.
RESULTS: No significant difference was observed between naive Bayes, decision 
tree, and logistic regression models for classification of both clinical 
diagnosis and CDR datasets. Participant classification (70.0-99.1%), geometric 
mean (60.9-98.1%), sensitivity (44.2-100%), and specificity (52.7-100%) were 
generally satisfactory. Unsurprisingly, the MCI/CDR = 0.5 participant group was 
the most challenging to classify. Through variable selection only 2-9 variables 
were required for classification and varied between datasets in a clinically 
meaningful way.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study results reveal that machine learning techniques 
can accurately classify cognitive impairment and reduce the number of measures 
required for diagnosis.
116
INTRODUCTION: Incidence rates of dementia-related neuropsychiatric symptoms 
(NPS) are not known and this hampers the assessment of their population burden. 
The objective of this study was to obtain an approximate estimate of the 
population incidence and prevalence of both dementia and NPS.
METHODS: Given the dynamic nature of the population with dementia, a 
retrospective study was conducted within the database of the Basque Health 
Service (real-world data) at the beginning and end of 2019. Validated random 
forest models were used to identify separately depressive and psychotic clusters 
according to their presence in the electronic health records of all patients 
diagnosed with dementia.
RESULTS: Among the 631,949 individuals over 60 years registered, 28,563 were 
diagnosed with dementia, of whom 15,828 (55.4%) showed psychotic symptoms and 
19,461 (68.1%) depressive symptoms. The incidence of dementia in 2019 was 
6.8/1000 person-years. Most incident cases of depressive (72.3%) and psychotic 
(51.9%) NPS occurred in cases of incident dementia. The risk of depressive-type 
NPS grows with years since dementia diagnosis, living in a nursing home, and 
female sex, but falls with older age. In the psychotic cluster model, the 
effects of male sex, and older age are inverted, both increasing the probability 
of this type of symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: The stigmatization factor conditions the social and attitudinal 
environment, delaying the diagnosis of dementia, preventing patients from 
receiving adequate care and exacerbating families' suffering. This study 
evidences the synergy between big data and real-world data for psychiatric 
epidemiological research.
117
BACKGROUND: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has challenged the 
accuracy and racial biases present in traditional mortality scores. An accurate 
prognostic model that can be applied to hospitalized patients irrespective of 
race or COVID-19 status may benefit patient care.
RESEARCH DESIGN: This cohort study utilized historical and ongoing electronic 
health record features to develop and validate a deep-learning model applied on 
the second day of admission predicting a composite outcome of in-hospital 
mortality, discharge to hospice, or death within 30 days of admission. Model 
features included patient demographics, diagnoses, procedures, inpatient 
medications, laboratory values, vital signs, and substance use history. 
Conventional performance metrics were assessed, and subgroup analysis was 
performed based on race, COVID-19 status, and intensive care unit admission.
SUBJECTS: A total of 35,521 patients hospitalized between April 2020 and October 
2020 at a single health care system including a tertiary academic referral 
center and 9 community hospitals.
RESULTS: Of 35,521 patients, including 9831 non-White patients and 2020 COVID-19 
patients, 2838 (8.0%) met the composite outcome. Patients who experienced the 
composite outcome were older (73 vs. 61 y old) with similar sex and race 
distributions between groups. The model achieved an area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve of 0.89 (95% confidence interval: 0.88, 0.91) and 
an average positive predictive value of 0.46 (0.40, 0.52). Model performance did 
not differ significantly in White (0.89) and non-White (0.90) subgroups or when 
grouping by COVID-19 status and intensive care unit admission.
CONCLUSION: A deep-learning model using large-volume, structured electronic 
health record data can effectively predict short-term mortality or hospice 
outcomes on the second day of admission in the general inpatient population 
without significant racial bias.
118
The projected burden of dementia by Alzheimer's disease (AD) represents a 
looming healthcare crisis as the population of most countries grows older. 
Although there is currently no cure, it is possible to treat symptoms of 
dementia. Early diagnosis is paramount to the development and success of 
interventions, and neuroimaging represents one of the most promising areas for 
early detection of AD. We aimed to deploy advanced deep learning methods to 
determine whether they can extract useful AD biomarkers from structural magnetic 
resonance imaging (sMRI) and classify brain images into AD, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), and cognitively normal (CN) groups. We tailored and trained 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) on sMRIs of the brain from datasets 
available in online databases. Our proposed method, ADNet, was evaluated on the 
CADDementia challenge and outperformed several approaches in the prior art. The 
method's configuration with machine-learning domain adaptation, ADNet-DA, 
reached 52.3% accuracy. Contributions of our study include devising a deep 
learning system that is entirely automatic and comparatively fast, presenting 
competitive results without using any patient's domain-specific knowledge about 
the disease. We were able to implement an end-to-end CNN system to classify 
subjects into AD, MCI, or CN groups, reflecting the identification of 
distinctive elements in brain images. In this context, our system represents a 
promising tool in finding biomarkers to help with the diagnosis of AD and, 
eventually, many other diseases.
119
BACKGROUND: For community-dwelling elderly individuals without enough clinical 
data, it is important to develop a method to predict their dementia risk and 
identify risk factors for the formulation of reasonable public health policies 
to prevent dementia.
OBJECTIVE: A community elderly survey data was used to establish machine 
learning prediction models for dementia and analyze the risk factors.
METHODS: In a cluster-sample community survey of 9,387 elderly people in 5 
subdistricts of Wuxi City, data on sociodemographics and neuropsychological 
self-rating scales for depression, anxiety, and cognition evaluation were 
collected. Machine learning models were developed to predict their dementia risk 
and identify risk factors.
RESULTS: The random forest model (AUC = 0.686) had slightly better dementia 
prediction performance than logistic regression model (AUC = 0.677) and neural 
network model (AUC = 0.664). The sociodemographic data and psychological 
evaluation revealed that depression (OR = 3.933, 95% CI = 2.995-5.166); anxiety 
(OR = 2.352, 95% CI = 1.577-3.509); multiple physical diseases (OR = 2.486, 95% 
CI = 1.882-3.284 for three or above); "disability, poverty or no family member" 
(OR = 1.859, 95% CI = 1.337-2.585) and "empty nester" (OR = 1.339, 95% 
CI = 1.125-1.595) in special family status; "no spouse now" (OR = 1.567, 95% 
CI = 1.118-2.197); age older than 80 years (OR = 1.645, 95% CI = 1.335-2.026); 
and female (OR = 1.214, 95% CI = 1.048-1.405) were risk factors for suspected 
dementia, while a higher education level (OR = 0.365, 95% CI = 0.245-0.546 for 
college or above) was a protective factor.
CONCLUSION: The machine learning models using sociodemographic and psychological 
evaluation data from community surveys can be used as references for the 
prevention and control of dementia in large-scale community populations and the 
formulation of public health policies.
120
BACKGROUND: The timely detection of Alzheimer's disease and other related 
dementias (ADRD) is suboptimal. Digital data already stored in electronic health 
records (EHR) offer opportunities for enhancing the timely detection of ADRD by 
facilitating the development of passive digital markers (PDMs). We conducted a 
systematic evidence review to identify studies that describe the development, 
performance, and validity of EHR-based PDMs for ADRD.
METHODS: We searched the literature published from January 2000 to August 2022 
and reviewed cross-sectional, retrospective, or prospective observational 
studies with a patient population of 18 years or older, published in English 
that collected and interpreted original data, included EHR as a source of 
digital data, and had the primary purpose of supporting ADRD care. We extracted 
relevant data from the included studies with guidance from the Critical 
Appraisal and Data Extraction for Systematic Reviews of Prediction Modelling 
Studies checklist and used the US Preventive Services Task Force criteria to 
appraise each study.
RESULTS: We included and appraised 19 studies. Four studies were considered to 
have a fair quality, and none was considered to have a good quality. The 
functionality of the PDMs varied from detecting mild cognitive impairment, 
Alzheimer's disease or ADRD, to forecasting stages of ADRD. Only seven studies 
used a valid reference diagnostic method. Nine PDMs used only structured EHR 
data, and five studies provided complete information on the race and ethnicity 
of its population. The number of features included in the PDMs ranges from 10 to 
853, and the PMDs used a variety of statistical and machine learning algorithms 
with various time-at-risk windows. The area under the curve (AUC) for the PDMs 
varied from 0.67 to 0.97.
CONCLUSION: Although we noted heterogeneity in the PDMs development and 
performance, there is evidence that these PDMs have the potential to detect ADRD 
at earlier stages.
121
Continuous vital signal monitoring is becoming more relevant in preventing 
diseases that afflict a large part of the world's population; for this reason, 
healthcare equipment should be easy to wear and simple to use. Non-intrusive and 
non-invasive detection methods are a basic requirement for wearable medical 
devices, especially when these are used in sports applications or by the elderly 
for self-monitoring. Arterial blood pressure (ABP) is an essential physiological 
parameter for health monitoring. Most blood pressure measurement devices 
determine the systolic and diastolic arterial blood pressure through the 
inflation and the deflation of a cuff. This technique is uncomfortable for the 
user and may result in anxiety, and consequently affect the blood pressure and 
its measurement. The purpose of this paper is the continuous measurement of the 
ABP through a cuffless, non-intrusive approach. The approach of this paper is 
based on deep learning techniques where several neural networks are used to 
infer ABP, starting from photoplethysmogram (PPG) and electrocardiogram (ECG) 
signals. The ABP was predicted first by utilizing only PPG and then by using 
both PPG and ECG. Convolutional neural networks (ResNet and WaveNet) and 
recurrent neural networks (LSTM) were compared and analyzed for the regression 
task. Results show that the use of the ECG has resulted in improved performance 
for every proposed configuration. The best performing configuration was obtained 
with a ResNet followed by three LSTM layers: this led to a mean absolute error 
(MAE) of 4.118 mmHg on and 2.228 mmHg on systolic and diastolic blood pressures, 
respectively. The results comply with the American National Standards of the 
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. ECG, PPG, and ABP 
measurements were extracted from the MIMIC database, which contains clinical 
signal data reflecting real measurements. The results were validated on a custom 
dataset created at Neuronica Lab, Politecnico di Torino.
122
BACKGROUND: Depression causes significant physical and psychosocial morbidity. 
Predicting persistence of depressive symptoms could permit targeted prevention, 
and lessen the burden of depression. Machine learning is a rapidly expanding 
field, and such approaches offer powerful predictive abilities. We investigated 
the utility of a machine learning approach to predict the persistence of 
depressive symptoms in older adults.
METHOD: Baseline demographic and psychometric data from 284 patients were used 
to predict the likelihood of older adults having persistent depressive symptoms 
after 12 months, using a machine learning approach ('extreme gradient 
boosting'). Predictive performance was compared to a conventional statistical 
approach (logistic regression). Data were drawn from the 'treatment-as-usual' 
arm of the CASPER (CollAborative care and active surveillance for 
Screen-Positive EldeRs with subthreshold depression) trial.
RESULTS: Predictive performance was superior using machine learning compared to 
logistic regression (mean AUC 0.72 vs. 0.67, p < 0.0001). Using machine 
learning, an average of 89% of those predicted to have PHQ-9 scores above 
threshold at 12 months actually did, compared to 78% using logistic regression. 
However, mean negative predictive values were somewhat lower for the machine 
learning approach (45% vs. 35%).
LIMITATIONS: A relatively small sample size potentially limited the predictive 
power of the algorithm. In addition, PHQ-9 scores were used as an indicator of 
persistent depressive symptoms, and whilst well validated, a clinical interview 
would have been preferable.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our findings support the potential application of machine 
learning in personalised mental healthcare.
123
BACKGROUND: Longitudinal studies predictably experience non-random attrition 
over time. Among older adults, risk factors for attrition may be similar to risk 
factors for outcomes such as cognitive decline and dementia, potentially biasing 
study results.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize participants lost to follow-up which can be useful in 
the study design and interpretation of results.
METHODS: In a longitudinal aging population study with 10 years of annual 
follow-up, we characterized the attrited participants (77%) compared to those 
who remained in the study. We used multivariable logistic regression models to 
identify attrition predictors. We then implemented four machine learning 
approaches to predict attrition status from one wave to the next and compared 
the results of all five approaches.
RESULTS: Multivariable logistic regression identified those more likely to drop 
out as older, male, not living with another study participant, having lower 
cognitive test scores and higher clinical dementia ratings, lower functional 
ability, fewer subjective memory complaints, no physical activity, reported 
hobbies, or engagement in social activities, worse self-rated health, and 
leaving the house less often. The four machine learning approaches using areas 
under the receiver operating characteristic curves produced similar 
discrimination results to the multivariable logistic regression model.
CONCLUSIONS: Attrition was most likely to occur in participants who were older, 
male, inactive, socially isolated, and cognitively impaired. Ignoring attrition 
would bias study results especially when the missing data might be related to 
the outcome (e.g. cognitive impairment or dementia). We discuss possible 
solutions including oversampling and other statistical modeling approaches.
124
INTRODUCTION: Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) signal 
distress or unmet needs and present a risk to people with dementia and their 
caregivers. Variability in the expression of these symptoms is a barrier to the 
performance of digital biomarkers. The aim of this study was to use wearable 
multimodal sensors to develop personalized machine learning models capable of 
detecting individual patterns of BPSD.
METHODS: Older adults with dementia and BPSD (n = 17) on a dementia care unit 
wore a wristband during waking hours for up to 8 weeks. The wristband captured 
motion (accelerometer) and physiological indicators (blood volume pulse, 
electrodermal activity, and skin temperature). Agitation or aggression events 
were tracked, and research staff reviewed videos to precisely annotate the 
sensor data. Personalized machine learning models were developed using 1-minute 
intervals and classifying the presence of behavioral symptoms, and behavioral 
symptoms by type (motor agitation, verbal aggression, or physical aggression).
RESULTS: Behavioral events were rare, representing 3.4% of the total data. 
Personalized models classified behavioral symptoms with a median area under the 
receiver operating curve (AUC) of 0.87 (range 0.64-0.95). The relative 
importance of the different sensor features to the predictive models varied both 
by individual and behavior type.
DISCUSSION: Patterns of sensor data associated with BPSD are highly 
individualized, and future studies of the digital phenotyping of these behaviors 
would benefit from personalization.
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
125
BACKGROUND: Dementia development is a complex process in which the occurrence 
and sequential relationships of different diseases or conditions may construct 
specific patterns leading to incident dementia.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to identify patterns of disease or symptom clusters 
and their sequences prior to incident dementia using a novel approach 
incorporating machine learning methods.
METHODS: Using Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database, data from 
15,700 older people with dementia and 15,700 nondementia controls matched on 
age, sex, and index year (n=10,466, 67% for the training data set and n=5234, 
33% for the testing data set) were retrieved for analysis. Using machine 
learning methods to capture specific hierarchical disease triplet clusters prior 
to dementia, we designed a study algorithm with four steps: (1) data 
preprocessing, (2) disease or symptom pathway selection, (3) model construction 
and optimization, and (4) data visualization.
RESULTS: Among 15,700 identified older people with dementia, 10,466 and 5234 
subjects were randomly assigned to the training and testing data sets, and 6215 
hierarchical disease triplet clusters with positive correlations with dementia 
onset were identified. We subsequently generated 19,438 features to construct 
prediction models, and the model with the best performance was support vector 
machine (SVM) with the by-group LASSO (least absolute shrinkage and selection 
operator) regression method (total corresponding features=2513; accuracy=0.615; 
sensitivity=0.607; specificity=0.622; positive predictive value=0.612; negative 
predictive value=0.619; area under the curve=0.639). In total, this study 
captured 49 hierarchical disease triplet clusters related to dementia 
development, and the most characteristic patterns leading to incident dementia 
started with cardiovascular conditions (mainly hypertension), cerebrovascular 
disease, mobility disorders, or infections, followed by neuropsychiatric 
conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Dementia development in the real world is an intricate process 
involving various diseases or conditions, their co-occurrence, and sequential 
relationships. Using a machine learning approach, we identified 49 hierarchical 
disease triplet clusters with leading roles (cardio- or cerebrovascular disease) 
and supporting roles (mental conditions, locomotion difficulties, infections, 
and nonspecific neurological conditions) in dementia development. Further 
studies using data from other countries are needed to validate the prediction 
algorithms for dementia development, allowing the development of comprehensive 
strategies to prevent or care for dementia in the real world.
Peng, Liang-Kung Chen. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet 
126
Social isolation and loneliness are major health concerns in young and older 
people. Traditional approaches to monitor the level of social interaction rely 
on self-reports. The goal of this study was to investigate if wearable 
textile-based sensors can be used to accurately detect if the user is talking as 
a future indicator of social interaction. In a laboratory study, fifteen healthy 
young participants were asked to talk while performing daily activities such as 
sitting, standing and walking. It is known that the breathing pattern differs 
significantly between normal and speech breathing (i.e., talking). We integrated 
resistive stretch sensors into wearable elastic bands, with a future integration 
into clothing in mind, to record the expansion and contraction of the chest and 
abdomen while breathing. We developed an algorithm incorporating machine 
learning and evaluated its performance in distinguishing between periods of 
talking and non-talking. In an intra-subject analysis, our algorithm detected 
talking with an average accuracy of 85%. The highest accuracy of 88% was 
achieved during sitting and the lowest accuracy of 80.6% during walking. 
Complete segments of talking were correctly identified with 96% accuracy. From 
the evaluated machine learning algorithms, the random forest classifier 
performed best on our dataset. We demonstrate that wearable textile-based 
sensors in combination with machine learning can be used to detect when the user 
is talking. In the future, this approach may be used as an indicator of social 
interaction to prevent social isolation and loneliness.
127
BACKGROUND: Technology-based computational strategies that leverage social 
network site (SNS) data to detect substance use are promising screening tools 
but rely on the presence of sufficient data to detect risk if it is present. A 
better understanding of the association between substance use and SNS 
participation may inform the utility of these technology-based screening tools.
OBJECTIVE: This paper aims to examine associations between substance use and 
Instagram posts and to test whether such associations differ as a function of 
age, gender, and race/ethnicity.
METHODS: Participants with an Instagram account were recruited primarily via 
Clickworker (N=3117). With participant permission and Instagram's approval, 
participants' Instagram photo posts were downloaded with an application program 
interface. Participants' past-year substance use was measured with an adapted 
version of the National Institute on Drug Abuse Quick Screen. At-risk drinking 
was defined as at least one past-year instance having "had more than a few 
alcoholic drinks a day," drug use was defined as any use of nonprescription 
drugs, and prescription drug use was defined as any nonmedical use of 
prescription medications. We used logistic regression to examine the 
associations between substance use and any Instagram posts and negative binomial 
regression to examine the associations between substance use and number of 
Instagram posts. We examined whether age (18-25, 26-38, 39+ years), gender, and 
race/ethnicity moderated associations in both logistic and negative binomial 
models. All differences noted were significant at the .05 level.
RESULTS: Compared with no at-risk drinking, any at-risk drinking was associated 
with both a higher likelihood of any Instagram posts and a higher number of 
posts, except among Hispanic/Latino individuals, in whom at-risk drinking was 
associated with a similar number of posts. Compared with no drug use, any drug 
use was associated with a higher likelihood of any posts but was associated with 
a similar number of posts. Compared with no prescription drug use, any 
prescription drug use was associated with a similar likelihood of any posts and 
was associated with a lower number of posts only among those aged 39 years and 
older. Of note, main effects showed that being female compared with being male 
and being Hispanic/Latino compared with being White were significantly 
associated with both a greater likelihood of any posts and a greater number of 
posts.
CONCLUSIONS: Researchers developing computational substance use risk detection 
models using Instagram or other SNS data may wish to consider our findings 
showing that at-risk drinking and drug use were positively associated with 
Instagram participation, while prescription drug use was negatively associated 
with Instagram participation for middle- and older-aged adults. As more is 
learned about SNS behaviors among those who use substances, researchers may be 
better positioned to successfully design and interpret innovative risk detection 
approaches.
DeLise, Saeed Hassanpour. Originally published in the Journal of Medical 
128
BACKGROUND: Reminiscence is the act of thinking or talking about personal 
experiences that occurred in the past. It is a central task of old age that is 
essential for healthy aging, and it serves multiple functions, such as 
decision-making and introspection, transmitting life lessons, and bonding with 
others. The study of social reminiscence behavior in everyday life can be used 
to generate data and detect reminiscence from general conversations.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this original paper are to (1) preprocess coded 
transcripts of conversations in German of older adults with natural language 
processing (NLP), and (2) implement and evaluate learning strategies using 
different NLP features and machine learning algorithms to detect reminiscence in 
a corpus of transcripts.
METHODS: The methods in this study comprise (1) collecting and coding of 
transcripts of older adults' conversations in German, (2) preprocessing 
transcripts to generate NLP features (bag-of-words models, part-of-speech tags, 
pretrained German word embeddings), and (3) training machine learning models to 
detect reminiscence using random forests, support vector machines, and adaptive 
and extreme gradient boosting algorithms. The data set comprises 2214 
transcripts, including 109 transcripts with reminiscence. Due to class imbalance 
in the data, we introduced three learning strategies: (1) class-weighted 
learning, (2) a meta-classifier consisting of a voting ensemble, and (3) data 
augmentation with the Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) 
algorithm. For each learning strategy, we performed cross-validation on a random 
sample of the training data set of transcripts. We computed the area under the 
curve (AUC), the average precision (AP), precision, recall, as well as F1 score 
and specificity measures on the test data, for all combinations of NLP features, 
algorithms, and learning strategies.
RESULTS: Class-weighted support vector machines on bag-of-words features 
outperformed all other classifiers (AUC=0.91, AP=0.56, precision=0.5, 
recall=0.45, F1=0.48, specificity=0.98), followed by support vector machines on 
SMOTE-augmented data and word embeddings features (AUC=0.89, AP=0.54, 
precision=0.35, recall=0.59, F1=0.44, specificity=0.94). For the meta-classifier 
strategy, adaptive and extreme gradient boosting algorithms trained on word 
embeddings and bag-of-words outperformed all other classifiers and NLP features; 
however, the performance of the meta-classifier learning strategy was lower 
compared to other strategies, with highly imbalanced precision-recall 
trade-offs.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence of the applicability of NLP and 
machine learning pipelines for the automated detection of reminiscence in older 
adults' everyday conversations in German. The methods and findings of this study 
could be relevant for designing unobtrusive computer systems for the real-time 
detection of social reminiscence in the everyday life of older adults and 
classifying their functions. With further improvements, these systems could be 
deployed in health interventions aimed at improving older adults' well-being by 
promoting self-reflection and suggesting coping strategies to be used in the 
case of dysfunctional reminiscence cases, which can undermine physical and 
mental health.
129
The structure and integrity of the ageing brain is interchangeably linked to 
physical health, and cardiometabolic risk factors (CMRs) are associated with 
dementia and other brain disorders. In this mixed cross-sectional and 
longitudinal study (interval mean = 19.7 months), including 790 healthy 
individuals (mean age = 46.7 years, 53% women), we investigated CMRs and health 
indicators including anthropometric measures, lifestyle factors, and blood 
biomarkers in relation to brain structure using MRI-based morphometry and 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). We performed tissue specific brain age 
prediction using machine learning and performed Bayesian multilevel modeling to 
assess changes in each CMR over time, their respective association with brain 
age gap (BAG), and their interaction effects with time and age on the 
tissue-specific BAGs. The results showed credible associations between DTI-based 
BAG and blood levels of phosphate and mean cell volume (MCV), and between 
T1-based BAG and systolic blood pressure, smoking, pulse, and C-reactive protein 
(CRP), indicating older-appearing brains in people with higher cardiometabolic 
risk (smoking, higher blood pressure and pulse, low-grade inflammation). 
Longitudinal evidence supported interactions between both BAGs and waist-to-hip 
ratio (WHR), and between DTI-based BAG and systolic blood pressure and smoking, 
indicating accelerated ageing in people with higher cardiometabolic risk 
(smoking, higher blood pressure, and WHR). The results demonstrate that 
cardiometabolic risk factors are associated with brain ageing. While randomized 
controlled trials are needed to establish causality, our results indicate that 
public health initiatives and treatment strategies targeting modifiable 
cardiometabolic risk factors may also improve risk trajectories and delay brain 
ageing.
130
BACKGROUND: Established clinical assessments for detecting dementia risk often 
require time, cost, and face-to-face meetings. We aimed to develop a Simplified 
Telephone Assessment for Dementia risk (STAD) (a new screening tool utilizing 
telephonic interviews to predict dementia risk) and examine the predictive 
validity of the STAD for the incidence of dementia.
METHODS: We developed STAD based on a combination of literature review, 
statistical analysis, and expert opinion. We selected 12 binary questions on 
subjective cognitive complaints, depressive symptoms, and lifestyle activities. 
In the validation study, we used STAD for 4298 community-dwelling older adults 
and observed the incidence of dementia during the 24-month follow-up period. The 
total score of STAD ranging from 0 to 12 was calculated, and the cut-off point 
for dementia incidence was determined using the Youden index. The survival rate 
of dementia incidence according to the cut-off points was determined. 
Furthermore, we used a decision-tree model (classification and regression tree, 
CART) to enhance the predictive ability of STAD for dementia risk screening.
RESULTS: The cut-off point of STAD was set at 4/5. Participants scoring ≥ 5 
points showed a significantly higher risk of dementia than those scoring ≤ 4 
points, even after adjusting for covariates (hazard ratio [95% confidence 
interval], 2.67 [1.40-5.08]). A decision tree model using the CART algorithm was 
constructed using 12 nodes with three STAD items. It showed better performance 
for dementia prediction in terms of accuracy and specificity as compared to the 
logistic regression model, although its sensitivity was worse than the logistic 
regression model.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a 12-item questionnaire, STAD, as a screening tool to 
predict dementia risk utilizing telephonic interviews and confirmed its 
predictive validity. Our findings might provide useful information for early 
screening of dementia risk and enable bridging between community and clinical 
settings. Additionally, STAD could be employed without face-to-face meetings in 
a short time; therefore, it may be a suitable screening tool for 
community-dwelling older adults who have negative attitudes toward clinical 
examination or are non-adherent to follow-up assessments in clinical trials.
131
BACKGROUND: Patient cohorts generated by machine learning can be enhanced with 
clinical knowledge to increase translational value and provide a practical 
approach to patient segmentation based on a mix of medical, behavioral, and 
social factors.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to generate a pragmatic example of how machine 
learning could be used to quickly and meaningfully cohort patients using 
unsupervised classification methods. Additionally, to demonstrate increased 
translational value of machine learning models through the integration of 
nursing knowledge.
METHODS: A primary care practice dataset (N = 3,438) of high-need patients 
defined by practice criteria was parsed to a subset population of patients with 
diabetes (n = 1233). Three expert nurses selected variables for k-means cluster 
analysis using knowledge of critical factors for care coordination. Nursing 
knowledge was again applied to describe the psychosocial phenotypes in four 
prominent clusters, aligned with social and medical care plans.
RESULTS: Four distinct clusters interpreted and mapped to psychosocial need 
profiles, allowing for immediate translation to clinical practice through the 
creation of actionable social and medical care plans. (1) A large cluster of 
racially diverse female, non-English speakers with low medical complexity, and 
history of childhood illness; (2) a large cluster of English speakers with 
significant comorbidities (obesity and respiratory disease); (3) a small cluster 
of males with substance use disorder and significant comorbidities (mental 
health, liver and cardiovascular disease) who frequently visit the hospital; and 
(4) a moderate cluster of older, racially diverse patients with renal failure.
CONCLUSION: This manuscript provides a practical method for analysis of primary 
care practice data using machine learning in tandem with expert clinical 
knowledge.
The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
132
CDSS (Clinical Decision Support System) is a domain within digital health that 
aims at supporting clinicians by suggesting the most probable diagnosis based on 
knowledge obtained from patient data. Usually, decision models used by current 
CDSS are static, i.e., they are not updated when new data are included, which 
could allow them to acquire new knowledge and enhance system accuracy. This 
paper proposes a dynamic decision model that automatically updates itself from 
classifier models using supervised machine learning algorithms. Our supervised 
learning process ranks several decision models using classifier performance 
measures, considering available patient data, filled by the health center, or 
local clinical guidelines. The decision model with the best performance is then 
selected to be used in our CDSS, which is designed for the diagnosis of D 
(Dementia), AD (Alzheimer's Disease), and MCI (Mild Cognitive Impairment). 
Patient datasets from CAD (Center for Alzheimer's Disease), at the Institute of 
Psychiatry of UFRJ (Federal University of Rio de Janeiro), and CRASI (Center of 
Reference in Attention to Health of the Elderly), at Antonio Pedro Hospital of 
UFF (Fluminense Federal University), are used. The main conclusion is that the 
proposed dynamic decision model, which offers the ability to be continuously 
refined with more recent diagnostic criteria or even personalized according to 
the local domain or clinical guidelines, provides an efficient alternative for 
diagnosis of Dementia, AD, and MCI.
133
Digital pen features model characteristics of sketches and user behavior, and 
can be used for various supervised machine learning (ML) applications, such as 
multi-stroke sketch recognition and user modeling. In this work, we use a 
state-of-the-art set of more than 170 digital pen features, which we implement 
and make publicly available. The feature set is evaluated in the use case of 
analyzing paper-pencil-based neurocognitive assessments in the medical domain. 
Most cognitive assessments, for dementia screening for example, are conducted 
with a pen on normal paper. We record these tests with a digital pen as part of 
a new interactive cognitive assessment tool with automatic analysis of pen 
input. The physician can, first, observe the sketching process in real-time on a 
mobile tablet, e.g., in telemedicine settings or to follow Covid-19 distancing 
regulations. Second, the results of an automatic test analysis are presented to 
the physician in real-time, thereby reducing manual scoring effort and producing 
objective reports. As part of our evaluation we examine how accurately different 
feature-based, supervised ML models can automatically score cognitive tests, 
with and without semantic content analysis. A series of ML-based sketch 
recognition experiments is conducted, evaluating 10 modern off-the-shelf ML 
classifiers (i.e., SVMs, Deep Learning, etc.) on a sketch data set which we 
recorded with 40 subjects from a geriatrics daycare clinic. In addition, an 
automated ML approach (AutoML) is explored for fine-tuning and optimizing 
classification performance on the data set, achieving superior recognition 
accuracies. Using standard ML techniques our feature set outperforms all 
previous approaches on the cognitive tests considered, i.e., the Clock Drawing 
Test, the Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test, and the Trail Making Test, by 
automatically scoring cognitive tests with up to 87.5% accuracy in a binary 
classification task.
134
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease that affects cognition 
and is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly. As the number of 
elderly individuals increases globally, the incidence and prevalence of AD are 
expected to increase. At present, AD is diagnosed clinically, according to 
accepted criteria. The essential elements in the diagnosis of AD include a 
patients history, a physical examination and neuropsychological testing, in 
addition to appropriate investigations such as neuroimaging. The omics-based 
approach is an emerging field of study that may not only aid in the diagnosis of 
AD but also facilitate the exploration of factors that influence the development 
of the disease. Omics techniques, including genomics, transcriptomics, 
proteomics and metabolomics, may reveal the pathways that lead to neuronal death 
and identify biomolecular markers associated with AD. This will further 
facilitate an understanding of AD neuropathology. In this review, omics-based 
approaches that were implemented in studies on AD were assessed from a 
bioinformatics perspective. Current state-of-the-art statistical and machine 
learning approaches used in the single omics analysis of AD were compared based 
on correlations of variants, differential expression, functional analysis and 
network analysis. This was followed by a review of the approaches used in the 
integration and analysis of multi-omics of AD. The strengths and limitations of 
multi-omics analysis methods were explored and the issues and challenges 
associated with omics studies of AD were highlighted. Lastly, future studies in 
this area of research were justified.
135
INTRODUCTION: Incidence rates of dementia-related neuropsychiatric symptoms 
(NPS) are not known and this hampers the assessment of their population burden. 
The objective of this study was to obtain an approximate estimate of the 
population incidence and prevalence of both dementia and NPS.
METHODS: Given the dynamic nature of the population with dementia, a 
retrospective study was conducted within the database of the Basque Health 
Service (real-world data) at the beginning and end of 2019. Validated random 
forest models were used to identify separately depressive and psychotic clusters 
according to their presence in the electronic health records of all patients 
diagnosed with dementia.
RESULTS: Among the 631,949 individuals over 60 years registered, 28,563 were 
diagnosed with dementia, of whom 15,828 (55.4%) showed psychotic symptoms and 
19,461 (68.1%) depressive symptoms. The incidence of dementia in 2019 was 
6.8/1000 person-years. Most incident cases of depressive (72.3%) and psychotic 
(51.9%) NPS occurred in cases of incident dementia. The risk of depressive-type 
NPS grows with years since dementia diagnosis, living in a nursing home, and 
female sex, but falls with older age. In the psychotic cluster model, the 
effects of male sex, and older age are inverted, both increasing the probability 
of this type of symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: The stigmatization factor conditions the social and attitudinal 
environment, delaying the diagnosis of dementia, preventing patients from 
receiving adequate care and exacerbating families' suffering. This study 
evidences the synergy between big data and real-world data for psychiatric 
epidemiological research.
136
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to explore the possibility of using machine learning 
(ML) in predicting the onset and trajectories of depressive symptom in 
home-based older adults over a 7-year period.
METHODS: Depressive symptom data (collected in the year 2011, 2013, 2015 and 
2018) of home-based older Chinese (n = 2650) recruited in the China Health and 
Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS) were included in the current analysis. 
The latent class growth modeling (LCGM) and growth mixture modeling (GMM) were 
used to classify different trajectory classes. Based on the identified 
trajectory patterns, three ML classification algorithms (i.e. gradient boosting 
decision tree, support vector machine and random forest) were evaluated with a 
10-fold cross-validation procedure and a metric of the area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve (AUC).
RESULTS: Four trajectories were identified for the depressive symptoms: no 
symptoms (63.9%), depressive symptoms onset {incident increasing symptoms 
[new-onset increasing (16.8%)], chronic symptoms [slowly decreasing (12.5%), 
persistent high (6.8%)]}. Among the analyzed baseline variables, the 10-item 
Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CESD-10) score, cognition, 
sleep time, self-reported memory were the top five important predictors across 
all trajectories. The mean AUCs of the three predictive models had a range from 
0.661 to 0.892.
CONCLUSIONS: ML techniques can be robust in predicting depressive symptom onset 
and trajectories over a 7-year period with easily accessible sociodemographic 
and health information.
Supplemental data for this article is available online at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13607863.2022.2031868.
137
The rapid increase in the senior population is posing serious challenges to 
national healthcare systems. Hence, innovative tools are needed to early detect 
health issues, including cognitive decline. Several clinical studies show that 
it is possible to identify cognitive impairment based on the locomotion patterns 
of the elderly. In this work, we investigate the use of sensor data and deep 
learning to recognize those patterns in instrumented smart-homes. In order to 
get rid of the noise introduced by indoor constraints and activity execution, we 
introduce novel visual feature extraction methods for locomotion data. Our 
solution relies on locomotion trace segmentation, image-based extraction of 
salient features from locomotion segments, and vision-based deep learning. We 
carried out extensive experiments with a large dataset acquired in a smart-home 
test bed from 153 seniors, including people with cognitive diseases. Results 
show that our system can accurately recognize the cognitive status of the 
senior, reaching a macro- F1 score of 0.873 for the three categories that we 
target: cognitive health, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia. Moreover, an 
experimental comparison shows that our system outperforms state-of-the-art 
methods.
138
Post-stroke depression is common, long-lasting and associated with severe 
morbidity and death, but mechanisms are not well-understood. We used a broad 
proteomics panel and developed a machine learning algorithm to determine whether 
plasma protein data can predict mood in people with chronic stroke, and to 
identify proteins and pathways associated with mood. We used Olink to measure 
1,196 plasma proteins in 85 participants aged 25 and older who were between 
5 months and 9 years after ischemic stroke. Mood was assessed with the Stroke 
Impact Scale mood questionnaire (SIS3). Machine learning multivariable 
regression models were constructed to estimate SIS3 using proteomics data, age, 
and time since stroke. We also dichotomized participants into better mood 
(SIS3 > 63) or worse mood (SIS3 ≤ 63) and analyzed candidate proteins. Machine 
learning models verified that there is indeed a relationship between plasma 
proteomic data and mood in chronic stroke, with the most accurate prediction of 
mood occurring when we add age and time since stroke. At the individual protein 
level, no single protein or set of proteins predicts mood. But by using 
univariate analyses of the proteins most highly associated with mood we produced 
a model of chronic post-stroke depression. We utilized the fact that this list 
contained many proteins that are also implicated in major depression. Also, over 
80% of immune proteins that correlate with mood were higher with worse mood, 
implicating a broadly overactive immune system in chronic post-stroke 
depression. Finally, we used a comprehensive literature review of major 
depression and acute post-stroke depression. We propose that in chronic 
post-stroke depression there is over-activation of the immune response that then 
triggers changes in serotonin activity and neuronal plasticity leading to 
depressed mood.
139
BACKGROUND: Delirium is an acute neurocognitive disorder that affects up to half 
of older hospitalized medical patients and can lead to dementia, longer hospital 
stays, increased health costs, and death. Although delirium can be prevented and 
treated, it is difficult to identify and predict.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to improve machine learning models that 
retrospectively identify the presence of delirium during hospital stays (eg, to 
measure the effectiveness of delirium prevention interventions) by using the 
natural language processing (NLP) technique of sentiment analysis (in this case 
a feature that identifies sentiment toward, or away from, a delirium diagnosis).
METHODS: Using data from the General Medicine Inpatient Initiative, a Canadian 
hospital data and analytics network, a detailed manual review of medical records 
was conducted from nearly 4000 admissions at 6 Toronto area hospitals. 
Furthermore, 25.74% (994/3862) of the eligible hospital admissions were labeled 
as having delirium. Using the data set collected from this study, we developed 
machine learning models with, and without, the benefit of NLP methods applied to 
diagnostic imaging reports, and we asked the question "can NLP improve machine 
learning identification of delirium?"
RESULTS: Among the eligible 3862 hospital admissions, 994 (25.74%) admissions 
were labeled as having delirium. Identification and calibration of the models 
were satisfactory. The accuracy and area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve of the main model with NLP in the independent testing data 
set were 0.807 and 0.930, respectively. The accuracy and area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve of the main model without NLP in the independent 
testing data set were 0.811 and 0.869, respectively. Model performance was also 
found to be stable over the 5-year period used in the experiment, with 
identification for a likely future holdout test set being no worse than 
identification for retrospective holdout test sets.
CONCLUSIONS: Our machine learning model that included NLP (ie, sentiment 
analysis in medical image description text mining) produced valid identification 
of delirium with the sentiment analysis, providing significant additional 
benefit over the model without NLP.
Razak, Amol Verma. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics 
140
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's Disease (AD) stands out as one of the main causes of 
dementia worldwide and it represents around 65% of all dementia cases, affecting 
mainly elderly people. AD is composed of three evolutionary stages: Mild 
Cognitive Impairment (MCI), Mild and Moderate AD (ADM) and Advanced AD (ADA). It 
is crucial to create a tool for assisting AD diagnosis in its early stages with 
the aim of halting the disease progression.
METHODS: The main purpose of this study is to develop a system with the ability 
of differentiate each disease stage by means of Electroencephalographic Signals 
(EEG). Thereby, an EEG nonlinear multi-band analysis by Wavelet Packet was 
performed enabling to extract several features from each study group. Classic 
Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) methods have been used for data 
classification per EEG channel.
RESULTS: The maximum accuracies obtained were 78.9% (Healthy controls (C) vs. 
MCI), 81.0% (C vs. ADM), 84.2% (C vs. ADA), 88.9% (MCI vs. ADM), 93.8% (MCI vs. 
ADA), 77.8% (ADM vs. ADA) and 56.8% (All vs. All).
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed method outperforms previous studies with the same 
database by 2% in binary comparison MCI vs. ADM and central and parietal brain 
regions revealed abnormal activity as AD progresses.
141
The behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) are challenging 
aspects of dementia care. This study used machine learning models to predict the 
occurrence of BPSD among community-dwelling older adults with dementia. We 
included 187 older adults with dementia for model training and 35 older adults 
with dementia for external validation. Demographic and health data and premorbid 
personality traits were examined at the baseline, and actigraphy was utilized to 
monitor sleep and activity levels. A symptom diary tracked caregiver-perceived 
symptom triggers and the daily occurrence of 12 BPSD classified into seven 
subsyndromes. Several prediction models were also employed, including logistic 
regression, random forest, gradient boosting machine, and support vector 
machine. The random forest models revealed the highest area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve (AUC) values for hyperactivity, euphoria/elation, 
and appetite and eating disorders; the gradient boosting machine models for 
psychotic and affective symptoms; and the support vector machine model showed 
the highest AUC. The gradient boosting machine model achieved the best 
performance in terms of average AUC scores across the seven subsyndromes. 
Caregiver-perceived triggers demonstrated higher feature importance values 
across the seven subsyndromes than other features. Our findings demonstrate the 
possibility of predicting BPSD using a machine learning approach.
142
Objectives.Parkinson's disease (PD) is a complex neurodegenerative disorder, 
affecting 2%-3% of the elderly population. Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), 
a rapid nonmotor screening test, assesses different cognitive dysfunctionality 
aspects. Early MoCA prediction may facilitate better temporal therapy and 
disease control. Radiomics features (RF), in addition to clinical features (CF), 
are indicated to increase clinical diagnoses, etc, bridging between medical 
imaging procedures and personalized medicine. We investigate the effect of RFs, 
CFs, and conventional imaging features (CIF) to enhance prediction performance 
using hybrid machine learning systems (HMLS).Methods.We selected 210 patients 
with 981 features (CFs, CIFs, and RFs) from the Parkinson's 
Progression-Markers-Initiative database. We generated 4 datasets, namely using 
(i), (ii) year-0 (D1) or year-1 (D2) features, (iii) longitudinal data (D3, 
putting datasets in years 0 and 1 longitudinally next to each other), and (iv) 
timeless data (D4, effectively doubling dataset size by listing both datasets 
from years 0 and 1 separately). First, we directly applied 23 predictor 
algorithms (PA) to the datasets to predict year-4 MoCA, which PD patients this 
year have a higher dementia risk. Subsequently, HMLSs, including 14 attribute 
extraction and 10 feature selection algorithms followed by PAs were employed to 
enhance prediction performances. 80% of all datapoints were utilized to select 
the best model based on minimum mean absolute error (MAE) resulting from 5-fold 
cross-validation. Subsequently, the remaining 20% was used for hold-out testing 
of the selected models.Results.When applying PAs without ASAs/FEAs to datasets 
(MoCA outcome range: [11,30]), Adaboost achieved an MAE of 1.74 ± 0.29 on D4 
with a hold-out testing performance of 1.71. When employing HMLSs, D4 + 
Minimum_Redundancy_Maximum_Relevance (MRMR)+K_Nearest_Neighbor Regressor 
achieved the highest performance of 1.05 ± 0.25 with a hold-out testing 
performance of 0.57.Conclusion.Our study shows the importance of using larger 
datasets (timeless), and utilizing optimized HMLSs, for significantly improved 
prediction of MoCA in PD patients.
143
BACKGROUND: The prevalence of depression among China's elderly is high, but 
stigma surrounding mental illness and a shortage of psychiatrists limit 
widespread screening and diagnosis of geriatric depression. We sought to develop 
a screening tool using easy-to-obtain and minimally sensitive predictors to 
identify elderly Chinese with depressive symptoms (depression hereafter) for 
referral to mental health services and determine the most important factors for 
effective screening.
METHODS: Using nationally representative survey data, we developed and 
externally validated the Chinese Geriatric Depression Risk calculator 
(CGD-Risk). CGD-Risk, a gradient boosting machine learning model, was evaluated 
based on discrimination (Concordance (C) statistic), calibration, and through a 
decision curve analysis. We conducted a sensitivity analysis on a cohort of 
middle-aged Chinese, a sub-group analysis using three data sets, and created 
predictor importance and partial dependence plots to enhance interpretability.
RESULTS: A total of 5681 elderly Chinese were included in the development data 
and 12,373 in the external validation data. CGD-Risk showed good discrimination 
during internal validation (C: 0.81, 95 % CI 0.79 to 0.84) and external 
validation (C: 0.77, 95 % CI: 0.76, 0.78). Compared to an alternative screening 
strategy CGD-Risk would correctly identify 17.8 more elderly with depression per 
100 people screened.
LIMITATIONS: We were only able to externally validate a partial version of 
CGD-Risk due to differences between the internal and external validation data.
CONCLUSIONS: CGD-Risk is a clinically viable, minimally sensitive screening tool 
that could identify elderly Chinese at high risk of depression while 
circumventing issues of response bias from stigma surrounding emotional 
openness.
144
BACKGROUND: Some studies have employed machine learning (ML) methods for 
mobility prediction modeling in older adults. ML methods could be a helpful tool 
for life-space mobility (LSM) data analysis.
AIM: This study aimed to evaluate the predictive value of ML algorithms for the 
restriction of life-space mobility (LSM) among elderly people and to identify 
the most important risk factors for that prediction model.
METHODS: A 2-year LSM reduction prediction model was developed using the 
ML-based algorithms decision tree, random forest, and eXtreme gradient boosting 
(XGBoost), and tested on an independent validation cohort. The data were 
collected from the International Mobility in Aging Study (IMIAS) from 2012 to 
2014, comprising 372 older patients (≥ 65 years of age). LSM was measured by the 
Life-Space Assessment questionnaire (LSA) with five levels of living space 
during the month before assessment.
RESULTS: According to the XGBoost algorithm, the best model reached a mean 
absolute error (MAE) of 10.28 and root-mean-square error (RMSE) of 12.91 in the 
testing portion. The variables frailty (39.4%), mobility disability (25.4%), 
depression (21.9%), and female sex (13.3%) had the highest importance.
CONCLUSION: The model identified risk factors through ML algorithms that could 
be used to predict LSM restriction; these risk factors could be used by 
practitioners to identify older adults with an increased risk of LSM reduction 
in the future. The XGBoost model offers benefits as a complementary method of 
traditional statistical approaches to understand the complexity of mobility.
AG.
145
BACKGROUND: Depression, a common worldwide mental disorder, which brings huge 
challenges to family and social burden around the world is different from 
fluctuant emotion and psychological pressure in their daily life. Although body 
signs have been shown to present manifestations of depression in general, few 
researches focus on whole body kinematic cues with the help of machine learning 
methods to aid depression recognition. Using the Kinect V2 device to record 
participants' simple kinematic skeleton data of the participant's body joints, 
the presented spatial features and low-level features is directly extracted from 
the record original Kinect-3D coordinates. This research aimed to constructed 
machine learning model with the preprocessed data importing, which could be used 
for depression automatic classification.
METHODS: Considering some patients' conditions and current status and refer to 
psychiatrists' advices, simple and significant designed stimulus task will lead 
human skeleton data collection job. With original Kinect skeleton data 
extracting and preprocessing, the proposed experiment demonstrated four strong 
machine learning tools: Support Vector Machine, Logistic Regression, Random 
Forest and Gradient Boosting. Using the precision, recall, sensitivity, 
specificity, roc-curve, confusion matrix et.al, indicators were calculated as 
the measurement of methods, which were commonly used to evaluate classification 
methodologies.
RESULTS: Across screened 64 pairs with age and gender totally matching in 
depression and control group, and Gradient Boosting achieved the best 
performance with the prediction accuracy of 76.92%. Sorted by female (54.69%) 
and male for the gender-based depression recognition, we applied best 
performance classifier Gradient Boosting got prediction accuracy of 66.67% in 
the male group, and 71.73% in the female group. Utilizing the best model 
Gradient Boosting for age-based classification, prediction accuracy got 76.92% 
in the older group (age >40, 50% of total) and 53.85% accuracy in the younger 
group (age <= 40).
CONCLUSION: The depression and non-depression individuals can be well classified 
by computational models using Kinect captured skeletal data. The Gradient 
Boosting, an excellent machine learning tool, get the performance in the four 
methods we demonstrated. Meanwhile, in the gender-based depression 
classification also gets reasonable accuracy. In particular, the recognition 
results of the old group are significantly better than that of the young group. 
All these findings suggest that kinematic skeletal data based depression 
recognition can be applied as an effective tool for assisting in depression 
analysis.
146
Early recognition of the risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD) onset is a global 
challenge that requires the development of reliable and affordable screening 
methods for wide-scale application. Proteomic studies of blood plasma are of 
particular relevance; however, the currently proposed differentiating markers 
are poorly consistent. The targeted quantitative multiple reaction monitoring 
(MRM) assay of the reported candidate biomarkers (CBs) can contribute to the 
creation of a consistent marker panel. An MRM-MS analysis of 149 nondepleted 
EDTA-plasma samples (MHRC, Russia) of patients with AD (n = 47), mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI, n = 36), vascular dementia (n = 8), frontotemporal dementia (n 
= 15), and an elderly control group (n = 43) was performed using the BAK 125 kit 
(MRM Proteomics Inc., Canada). Statistical analysis revealed a significant 
decrease in the levels of afamin, apolipoprotein E, biotinidase, and serum 
paraoxonase/arylesterase 1 associated with AD. Different training algorithms for 
machine learning were performed to identify the protein panels and build 
corresponding classifiers for the AD prognosis. Machine learning revealed 31 
proteins that are important for AD differentiation and mostly include reported 
earlier CBs. The best-performing classifiers reached 80% accuracy, 79.4% 
sensitivity and 83.6% specificity and were able to assess the risk of developing 
AD over the next 3 years for patients with MCI. Overall, this study demonstrates 
the high potential of the MRM approach combined with machine learning to confirm 
the significance of previously identified CBs and to propose consistent protein 
marker panels.
147
BACKGROUND: Loneliness is a growing public health issue in the developed world. 
Among older adults, loneliness is a particular challenge, as the older segment 
of the population is growing and loneliness is comorbid with many mental as well 
as physical health issues. Comorbidity and common cause factors make identifying 
the antecedents of loneliness difficult, however, contemporary machine learning 
techniques are positioned to tackle this problem.
METHODS: This study analyzed four cohorts of older individuals, split into two 
age groups - 45-69 and 70-79 - to examine which common psychological and 
sociodemographic are associated with loneliness at different ages. Gradient 
boosted modeling, a machine learning technique, and regression models were used 
to identify and replicate associations with loneliness.
RESULTS: In all cohorts, higher emotional stability was associated with lower 
loneliness. In the older group, social circumstances such as living alone were 
also associated with higher loneliness. In the younger group, extraversion's 
association with lower loneliness was the only other confirmed relationship.
CONCLUSIONS: Different individual and social factors might underlie loneliness 
differences in distinct age groups. Machine learning methods have the potential 
to unveil novel associations between psychological and social variables, 
particularly interactions, and mental health outcomes.
148
IMPORTANCE: Because more than one-third of people making nonfatal suicide 
attempts do not receive mental health treatment, it is essential to extend 
suicide attempt risk factors beyond high-risk clinical populations to the 
general adult population.
OBJECTIVE: To identify future suicide attempt risk factors in the general 
population using a data-driven machine learning approach including more than 
2500 questions from a large, nationally representative survey of US adults.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Data came from wave 1 (2001 to 2002) and wave 
2 (2004 to 2005) of the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related 
Conditions (NESARC). NESARC is a face-to-face longitudinal survey conducted with 
a national representative sample of noninstitutionalized civilian population 18 
years and older in the US. The cumulative response rate across both waves was 
70.2% resulting in 34 653 wave 2 interviews. A balanced random forest was 
trained using cross-validation to develop a suicide attempt risk model. 
Out-of-fold model prediction was used to assess model performance, including the 
area under the receiver operator curve, sensitivity, and specificity. Survey 
design and nonresponse weights allowed estimates to be representative of the US 
civilian population based on the 2000 census. Analyses were performed between 
May 15, 2019, and June 10, 2020.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Attempted suicide in the 3 years between wave 1 and 
wave 2 interviews.
RESULTS: Of 34 653 participants, 20 089 were female (weighted proportion, 
52.1%). The weighted mean (SD) age was 45.1 (17.3) years at wave 1 and 48.2 
(17.3) years at wave 2. Attempted suicide during the 3 years between wave 1 and 
wave 2 interviews was self-reported by 222 of 34 653 participants (0.6%). Using 
survey questions measured at wave 1, the suicide attempt risk model yielded a 
cross-validated area under the receiver operator characteristic curve of 0.857 
with a sensitivity of 85.3% (95% CI, 79.8-89.7) and a specificity of 73.3% (95% 
CI, 72.8-73.8) at an optimized threshold. The model identified 1.8% of the US 
population to be at a 10% or greater risk of suicide attempt. The most important 
risk factors were 3 questions about previous suicidal ideation or behavior; 3 
items from the 12-Item Short Form Health Survey, namely feeling downhearted, 
doing activities less carefully, or accomplishing less because of emotional 
problems; younger age; lower educational achievement; and recent financial 
crisis.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this study, after searching through more than 2500 
survey questions, several well-known risk factors of suicide attempt were 
confirmed, such as previous suicidal behaviors and ideation, and new risks were 
identified, including functional impairment resulting from mental disorders and 
socioeconomic disadvantage. These results may help guide future clinical 
assessment and the development of new suicide risk scales.
149
BACKGROUND: Our objective was to assess the performance of machine learning 
methods to predict post-operative delirium using a prospective clinical cohort.
METHODS: We analyzed data from an observational cohort study of 560 older adults 
(≥ 70 years) without dementia undergoing major elective non-cardiac surgery. 
Post-operative delirium was determined by the Confusion Assessment Method 
supplemented by a medical chart review (N = 134, 24%). Five machine learning 
algorithms and a standard stepwise logistic regression model were developed in a 
training sample (80% of participants) and evaluated in the remaining hold-out 
testing sample. We evaluated three overlapping feature sets, restricted to 
variables that are readily available or minimally burdensome to collect in 
clinical settings, including interview and medical record data. A large feature 
set included 71 potential predictors. A smaller set of 18 features was selected 
by an expert panel using a consensus process, and this smaller feature set was 
considered with and without a measure of pre-operative mental status.
RESULTS: The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) was 
higher in the large feature set conditions (range of AUC, 0.62-0.71 across 
algorithms) versus the selected feature set conditions (AUC range, 0.53-0.57). 
The restricted feature set with mental status had intermediate AUC values 
(range, 0.53-0.68). In the full feature set condition, algorithms such as 
gradient boosting, cross-validated logistic regression, and neural network 
(AUC = 0.71, 95% CI 0.58-0.83) were comparable with a model developed using 
traditional stepwise logistic regression (AUC = 0.69, 95% CI 0.57-0.82). 
Calibration for all models and feature sets was poor.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed machine learning prediction models for post-operative 
delirium that performed better than chance and are comparable with traditional 
stepwise logistic regression. Delirium proved to be a phenotype that was 
difficult to predict with appreciable accuracy.
150
BACKGROUND: Currently, an estimated 25-30% of people ages 85 or older have 
dementia, with a projected 115 million people worldwide living with dementia by 
at-risk older adults and development of interventions focused on preventing loss 
in quality of life are increasingly important. A new construct defined by the 
International Consensus Group (I.A.N.A/I.A.G.G) as «cognitive frailty» combines 
domains of physical frailty with cognitive impairment and provides a framework 
for research that may provide a means to identify individuals with cognitive 
impairment caused by nonneurodegenerative conditions. Using the integrative 
review method of Whittemore and Knafl., 2005 this study examines and appraises 
the optimal measures for detecting cognitive frailty in clinical populations of 
older adults.
METHODS: The integrative review was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Web of 
Science, PsycInfo, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. From the total 185 
articles retrieved, review of titles and key words were conducted. Following the 
initial review, 168 articles did not meet the inclusion criteria for association 
of frailty and cognition. Of the 18 fulltext articles reviewed, 11 articles met 
the inclusion criteria; these articles were reviewed in-depth to determine 
validity and reliability of the cognitive frailty measures.
RESULTS: Predictive validity was established by the studies reviewed in four 
main areas: frailty and type of dementia MCI (OR 7.4, 95% CI 4.2-13.2), vascular 
dementia (OR 6.7, 95% CI 1.6-27.4) and Alzheimer's dementia (OR 3.2, 95% CI 
1.7-6.2), frailty and vascular dementia (VaAD) is further supported by the rate 
of change in frailty x macroinfarcts (r = 0.032, p < 0.001); frailty and the 
individual domains of cognitive function established with the relationship of 
neurocognitive speed and change in cognition using regression coefficients; 
individual components of frailty and individual domains of cognitive function 
associations inculded slow gait and executive function (β -0.20, p < 0.008 ), 
attention (β -0.25 p < 0.008), processing speed (β -0.16, p < 0.008), word 
recall (β - 0.18, p = 0.02), and logical memory (β = 0.04, p =0.04). Weak grip 
was predictive for changes in executive function (β - 0.16, p =0.008). Physical 
activity was associated with changes in executive function (β = -0.18, p= 0.02) 
and word recall (β = 0.17, p= 0.02), individual components of frailty and global 
cognitive function were found in several studies which included grip strength (r 
= - 0.51, p < 0.001), gait speed (r = - 0.067, p < 0.001), and exhaustion (β - 
0.18, p < 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: This paper presents the first-known review of the measurement 
properties for the cognitive frailty construct since the published results from 
the International Consensus Group (I.A.N.A/I.A.G.G). Evidence presented in this 
review continues to support the link between physical frailty and cognition with 
developing validity to support distinct relationships between components of 
physical frailty and cognitive decline. Results call attention to 
inconsistencies in reporting of reliability, validity, and heterogeneity in the 
measurements and operational definition for cognitive frailty. Further research 
is needed to establish an operational definition and develop psychometrically 
appropriate clinical measures to construct an understanding of the relationship 
between physical frailty and cognitive decline.
151
IMPORTANCE: Almost 25% of Medicare beneficiaries live in residential long-term 
care (LTC) (eg, independent or assisted living facility or nursing home). There 
are few reliable statistics on completed suicide in LTC, in part because of data 
limitations.
OBJECTIVES: To estimate the number of suicides associated with residential LTC 
(ie, among persons in a facility, transitioning into or out of a facility, or 
otherwise associated with LTC) among adults 55 and older and, secondarily, to 
identify whether machine learning tools could improve the quality of suicide 
surveillance data.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Cross-sectional epidemiologic study 
(conducted in 2018) of restricted-access data from the National Violent Death 
Reporting System (NVDRS) (2003-2015) using restricted-access case narratives 
from suicides and undetermined deaths among adults 55 years and older in 27 
states. Participants were all suicides and undetermined deaths (N = 47 759) 
among persons 55 years and older.
EXPOSURE: Long-term care cited in the coroner/medical examiner case narrative, 
whether as a reason for self-harm or the injury location, identified using 
machine learning natural language processing (NLP) algorithms plus manual review 
of texts.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Number and characteristics (eg, demographics, health 
history, and means of injury) of suicides associated with LTC. The κ statistic 
was used to estimate the reliability of the existing NVDRS injury location codes 
relative to cases identified by the algorithm.
RESULTS: Among 47 759 persons 55 years and older (median age, 64 years; 77.6% 
male; 90.0% non-Hispanic white), this study identified 1037 suicide deaths 
associated with LTC, including 428 among older adults living in LTC, 449 among 
older adults transitioning to LTC, and 160 otherwise associated with LTC. In 
contrast, there were only 263 cases coded with the existing NVDRS location code 
"supervised residential facility," which had poor agreement with cases that the 
algorithm identified as occurring in LTC (κ statistic, 0.30; 95% CI, 0.26-0.35).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Over a 13-year period, approximately 2.2% of suicides 
among adults 55 years and older were associated with LTC in some manner. 
Clinicians, administrators, and policy makers should consider ways to promote 
the mental health and well-being of older adults experiencing functioning 
limitations and their families. Natural language processing may be a useful way 
to improve abstraction of variables in the NVDRS.
152
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to identify the factors that impact mental health 
service use among American Indian (AI) older adults living in South Dakota 
compared to their White counterparts.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Using a cross-sectional design with 735 participants 
(n = 502 Whites, n = 233 AIs), we used ordinal regressions to analyze the extent 
to which predisposing, need, and enabling/hindering factors predicted the level 
of mental health service utilization.
RESULTS: White older adults used more mental health services as compared with AI 
older adults. For both groups, more adverse childhood experiences along with 
prior negative experience with mental health service use were significantly 
related to an increased level of mental health service use. Compared to their 
White counterparts, AI older adults who reported a higher level of depressive 
symptoms, better self-perceived physical health, and a more positive attitude 
toward mental health services tended to use more mental health services.
CONCLUSIONS: To reduce mental health disparities among AI older adults, 
community, local government, and academic partners should pay attention to how 
to encourage the use of mental health services to meet the unique needs of AI 
older adults.
153
OBJECTIVES: To identify mechanisms underpinning the complex relationships 
between influential factors and suicide risk with psychological autopsy data and 
machine learning method.
DESIGN: A case-control study with suicide deaths selected using two-stage 
stratified cluster sampling method; and 1:1 age-and-gender matched live controls 
in the same geographic area.
SETTING: Disproportionately high risk of suicide among rural elderly in China.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 242 subjects died from suicide and 242 matched live 
controls, 60 years of age and older.
MEASUREMENTS: Suicide death was determined based on the ICD-10 codes. 
Influential factors were measured using validated instruments and commonly 
accepted variables.
RESULTS: Of the total sample, 270 (55.8%) were male with mean age = 74.2 (SD = 
8.2) years old. Four CART models were used to select influential factors using 
the criteria: areas under the curve (AUC) ≥ 0.8, sensitivity ≥ 0.8, and 
specificity ≥ 0.8. Each model included a lead predictor plus 8-10 hierarchically 
nested factors. Depression was the first to be selected in Model 1 as the lead 
predictor; After depression was excluded, quality of life (QOL) was selected in 
Model 2; After depression and QOL were excluded, social support was selected in 
Model 3. Finally, after all 3 lead factors were excluded, marital status was 
selected in Model 4. In addition, CART demonstrated the significance of several 
influential factors that would not be associated with suicide if the data were 
analyzed using the conventional logistic regression.
CONCLUSION: Associations between the key factors and suicide death for Chinese 
rural elderly are not linear and parallel but hierarchically nested that could 
not be effectively detected using conventional statistical methods. Findings of 
this study provide new and compelling evidence supporting tailored suicide 
prevention interventions at the familial, clinical and community levels.
154
The effort to limit the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) has relied heavily 
on the general public's compliance with health guidelines limiting social 
contact and mitigating risk when contact occurs. The aim of this study was to 
identify latent variables underlying adherence to COVID-19 guidelines and to 
examine demographic and psychological predictors of adherence. A sample of US 
adults (N = 1,200) were surveyed in late April to mid-May 2020. The factor 
structure of adherence was examined using exploratory factor analysis. Machine 
learning regression models using elastic net regularization were used to examine 
predictors of adherence. Two factors characterized adherence: avoidance and 
cleaning. Elastic net models identified differential demographic and 
psychological predictors of these two forms of adherence. Religious affiliation, 
denial coping, full-time employment, substance use coping, and being 60 or older 
predicted lower avoidance adherence. Behavioral and mindfulness emotion 
regulation skills, agreeableness, and Democrat political affiliation predicted 
greater avoidance adherence. For cleaning adherence, interpersonal and 
behavioral emotion regulation skills and conscientiousness emerged as strong 
predictors of greater cleaning. Efforts to promote compliance with COVID-19 
health guidelines may benefit from distinguishing avoidance and cleaning 
adherence and considering predictors of each of these aspects of adherence.
155
With the global trend toward an aging population, the increasing number of 
dementia patients and elderly living alone has emerged as a serious social issue 
in South Korea. The assessment of activities of daily living (ADL) is essential 
for diagnosing dementia. However, since the assessment is based on the ADL 
questionnaire, it relies on subjective judgment and lacks objectivity. Seven 
healthy seniors and six with early-stage dementia participated in the study to 
obtain ADL data. The derived ADL features were generated by smart home sensors. 
Statistical methods and machine learning techniques were employed to develop a 
model for auto-classifying the normal controls and early-stage dementia 
patients. The proposed approach verified the developed model as an objective ADL 
evaluation tool for the diagnosis of dementia. A random forest algorithm was 
used to compare a personalized model and a non-personalized model. The 
comparison result verified that the accuracy (91.20%) of the personalized model 
was higher than that (84.54%) of the non-personalized model. This indicates that 
the cognitive ability-based personalization showed encouraging performance in 
the classification of normal control and early-stage dementia and it is expected 
that the findings of this study will serve as important basic data for the 
objective diagnosis of dementia.
156
BACKGROUND: Biomarkers for the early detection of dementia risk hold promise for 
better disease monitoring and targeted interventions. However, most biomarker 
studies, particularly in neuroimaging, have analysed artificially 'clean' 
research groups, free from comorbidities, erroneous referrals, contraindications 
and from a narrow sociodemographic pool. Such biases mean that neuroimaging 
samples are often unrepresentative of the target population for dementia risk 
(e.g., people referred to a memory clinic), limiting the generalisation of these 
studies to real-world clinical settings. To facilitate better translation from 
research to the clinic, datasets that are more representative of dementia 
patient groups are warranted.
METHODS: We analysed T1-weighted MRI scans from a real-world setting of patients 
referred to UK memory clinic services (n = 1140; 60.2 % female and mean [SD] age 
of 70.0[10.8] years) to derive 'brain-age'. Brain-age is an index of age-related 
brain health based on quantitative analysis of structural neuroimaging, largely 
reflecting brain atrophy. Brain-predicted age difference (brain-PAD) was 
calculated as brain-age minus chronological age. We determined which patients 
went on to develop dementia between three months and 7.8 years after 
neuroimaging assessment (n = 476) using linkage to electronic health records.
RESULTS: Survival analysis, using Cox regression, indicated a 3 % increased risk 
of dementia per brain-PAD year (hazard ratio [95 % CI] = 1.03 [1.02,1.04], 
p < 0.0001), adjusted for baseline age, age2, sex, Mini Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) score and normalised brain volume. In sensitivity analyses, brain-PAD 
remained significant when time-to-dementia was at least 3 years (hazard ratio 
[95 % CI] = 1.06 [1.02, 1.09], p = 0.0006), or when baseline MMSE score ≥ 27 
(hazard ratio [95 % CI] = 1.03 [1.01, 1.05], p = 0.0006).
CONCLUSIONS: Memory clinic patients with older-appearing brains are more likely 
to receive a subsequent dementia diagnosis. Potentially, brain-age could aid 
decision-making during initial memory clinic assessment to improve early 
detection of dementia. Even when neuroimaging assessment was more than 3 years 
prior to diagnosis and when cognitive functioning was not clearly impaired, 
brain-age still proved informative. These real-world results support the use of 
quantitative neuroimaging biomarkers like brain-age in memory clinics.
157
Resting-state fMRI has been widely used in investigating the pathophysiology of 
late-life depression (LLD). Unlike the conventional linear approach, 
cross-sample entropy (CSE) analysis shows the nonlinear property in fMRI signals 
between brain regions. Moreover, recent advances in deep learning, such as 
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), provide a timely application for 
understanding LLD. Accurate and prompt diagnosis is essential in LLD; hence, 
this study aimed to combine CNN and CSE analysis to discriminate LLD patients 
and non-depressed comparison older adults based on brain resting-state fMRI 
signals. Seventy-seven older adults, including 49 patients and 28 comparison 
older adults, were included for fMRI scans. Three-dimensional CSEs with volumes 
corresponding to 90 seed regions of interest of each participant were developed 
and fed into models for disease classification and depression severity 
prediction. We obtained a diagnostic accuracy > 85% in the superior frontal 
gyrus (left dorsolateral and right orbital parts), left insula, and right middle 
occipital gyrus. With a mean root-mean-square error (RMSE) of 2.41, three 
separate models were required to predict depressive symptoms in the severe, 
moderate, and mild depression groups. The CSE volumes in the left inferior 
parietal lobule, left parahippocampal gyrus, and left postcentral gyrus 
performed best in each respective model. Combined complexity analysis and deep 
learning algorithms can classify patients with LLD from comparison older adults 
and predict symptom severity based on fMRI data. Such application can be 
utilized in precision medicine for disease detection and symptom monitoring in 
LLD.
158
OBJECTIVES: Contemporary immigration scholarship has typically treated 
immigrants with diverse racial backgrounds as a monolithic population. Knowledge 
gaps remain in understanding how racial and nativity inequities in mental health 
care intersect and unfold in midlife and old age. This study aims to examine the 
joint impact of race, migration, and old age in shaping mental health treatment.
METHODS: Pooled data were obtained from the Canadian Community Health Survey 
(2015-2018) and restricted to respondents (aged ≥45 years) with mood or anxiety 
disorders (n = 9,099). Multivariable logistic regression was performed to 
estimate associations between race-migration nexus and past-year mental health 
consultations (MHC). Classification and regression tree (CART) analysis was 
applied to identify intersecting determinants of MHC.
RESULTS: Compared to Canadian-born Whites, racialized immigrants had greater 
mental health needs: poor/fair self-rated mental health (odds ratio [OR] = 2.23, 
99% confidence interval [CI]: 1.67-2.99), perceived life stressful (OR = 1.49, 
99% CI: 1.14-1.95), psychiatric comorbidity (OR = 1.42, 99% CI: 1.06-1.89), and 
unmet needs for care (OR = 2.02, 99% CI: 1.36-3.02); in sharp contrast, they 
were less likely to access mental health services across most indicators: 
overall past-year MHC (OR = 0.54, 99% CI: 0.41-0.71) and consultations with 
family doctors (OR = 0.67, 99% CI: 0.50-0.89), psychologists (OR = 0.54, 99% CI: 
0.33-0.87), and social workers (OR = 0.37, 99% CI: 0.21-0.65), with the 
exception of psychiatrist visits (p = .324). The CART algorithm identifies three 
groups at risk of MHC service underuse: racialized immigrants aged ≥55 years, 
immigrants without high school diplomas, and linguistic minorities who were home 
renters.
DISCUSSION: To safeguard health care equity for medically underserved 
communities in Canada, multisectoral efforts need to guarantee culturally 
responsive mental health care, multilingual services, and affordable housing for 
racialized immigrant older adults with mental disorders.
Gerontological Society of America.
159
Dementia is an incurable neurodegenerative disease primarily affecting the older 
population, for which the World Health Organisation has set to promoting early 
diagnosis and timely management as one of the primary goals for dementia care. 
While a range of popular machine learning algorithms and their variants have 
been applied for dementia diagnosis, fuzzy systems, which have been known 
effective in dealing with uncertainty and offer to explicitly reason how a 
diagnosis can be inferred, sporadically appear in recent literature. Given the 
advantages of a fuzzy rule-based model, which could potentially result in a 
clinical decision support system that offers understandable rules and a 
transparent inference process to support dementia diagnosis, this paper proposes 
a novel fuzzy inference system by adapting the concept of dominant sets that 
arise from the study of graph theory. A peeling-off strategy is used to 
iteratively extract from the constructed edge-weighted graph a collection of 
dominant sets. Each dominant set is further converted into a parameterized fuzzy 
rule, which is finally optimized in a supervised adaptive network-based fuzzy 
inference framework. An illustrative example is provided that demonstrates the 
interpretable rules and the transparent reasoning process of reaching a 
decision. Further systematic experiments conducted on data from the Open Access 
Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS) repository, also validate its superior 
performance over alternative methods.
160
BACKGROUND: Early differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is important for treatment and disease 
management, but it remains challenging. Although computer-based drawing analysis 
may help differentiate AD and DLB, it has not been studied.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify the differences in features characterizing the 
drawing process between AD, DLB, and cognitively normal (CN) individuals, and to 
evaluate the validity of using these features to identify and differentiate AD 
and DLB.
METHODS: We collected drawing data with a digitizing tablet and pen from 123 
community-dwelling older adults in three clinical diagnostic groups of mild 
cognitive impairment or dementia due to AD (n = 47) or Lewy body disease (LBD; 
n = 27), and CN (n = 49), matched for their age, sex, and years of education. We 
then investigated drawing features in terms of the drawing speed, pressure, and 
pauses.
RESULTS: Reduced speed and reduced smoothness in speed and pressure were 
observed particularly in the LBD group, while increased pauses and total 
durations were observed in both the AD and LBD groups. Machine-learning models 
using these features achieved an area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.80 for AD versus CN, 0.88 for LBD versus CN, and 
0.77 for AD versus LBD.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate how different types of drawing features were 
particularly discriminative between the diagnostic groups, and how the 
combination of these features can facilitate the identification and 
differentiation of AD and DLB.
161
Dementia is a cognitive disorder that mainly targets older adults. At present, 
dementia has no cure or prevention available. Scientists found that dementia 
symptoms might emerge as early as ten years before the onset of real disease. As 
a result, machine learning (ML) scientists developed various techniques for the 
early prediction of dementia using dementia symptoms. However, these methods 
have fundamental limitations, such as low accuracy and bias in machine learning 
(ML) models. To resolve the issue of bias in the proposed ML model, we deployed 
the adaptive synthetic sampling (ADASYN) technique, and to improve accuracy, we 
have proposed novel feature extraction techniques, namely, feature extraction 
battery (FEB) and optimized support vector machine (SVM) using radical basis 
function (rbf) for the classification of the disease. The hyperparameters of SVM 
are calibrated by employing the grid search approach. It is evident from the 
experimental results that the newly pr oposed model (FEB-SVM) improves the 
dementia prediction accuracy of the conventional SVM by 6%. The proposed model 
(FEB-SVM) obtained 98.28% accuracy on training data and a testing accuracy of 
93.92%. Along with accuracy, the proposed model obtained a precision of 91.80%, 
recall of 86.59, F1-score of 89.12%, and Matthew's correlation coefficient (MCC) 
of 0.4987. Moreover, the newly proposed model (FEB-SVM) outperforms the 12 
state-of-the-art ML models that the researchers have recently presented for 
dementia prediction.
162
INTRODUCTION: We sought to assess longitudinal electronic health records (EHRs) 
using machine learning (ML) methods to computationally derive probable 
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and related dementia subphenotypes.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of EHR data from a cohort of 7587 patients 
seen at a large, multi-specialty urban academic medical center in New York was 
conducted. Subphenotypes were derived using hierarchical clustering from 792 
probable AD patients (cases) who had received at least one diagnosis of AD using 
their clinical data. The other 6795 patients, labeled as controls, were matched 
on age and gender with the cases and randomly selected in the ratio of 9:1. 
Prediction models with multiple ML algorithms were trained on this cohort using 
5-fold cross-validation. XGBoost was used to rank the variable importance.
RESULTS: Four subphenotypes were computationally derived. Subphenotype A (n = 
273; 28.2%) had more patients with cardiovascular diseases; subphenotype B (n = 
221; 27.9%) had more patients with mental health illnesses, such as depression 
and anxiety; patients in subphenotype C (n = 183; 23.1%) were overall older 
(mean (SD) age, 79.5 (5.4) years) and had the most comorbidities including 
diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and mental health disorders; and subphenotype 
D (n = 115; 14.5%) included patients who took anti-dementia drugs and had 
sensory problems, such as deafness and hearing impairment.The 0-year prediction 
model for AD risk achieved an area under the receiver operating curve (AUC) of 
0.764 (SD: 0.02); the 6-month model, 0.751 (SD: 0.02); the 1-year model, 0.752 
(SD: 0.02); the 2-year model, 0.749 (SD: 0.03); and the 3-year model, 0.735 (SD: 
0.03), respectively. Based on variable importance, the top-ranked comorbidities 
included depression, stroke/transient ischemic attack, hypertension, anxiety, 
mobility impairments, and atrial fibrillation. The top-ranked medications 
included anti-dementia drugs, antipsychotics, antiepileptics, and 
antidepressants.
CONCLUSIONS: Four subphenotypes were computationally derived that correlated 
with cardiovascular diseases and mental health illnesses. ML algorithms based on 
patient demographics, diagnosis, and treatment demonstrated promising results in 
predicting the risk of developing AD at different time points across an 
individual's lifespan.
on behalf of the University of Michigan.
163
INTRODUCTION: Many cancer survivors report cognitive problems following 
diagnosis and treatment. However, the clinical significance of patient-reported 
cognitive symptoms early in survivorship can be unclear. We used a machine 
learning approach to determine the association of persistent self-reported 
cognitive symptoms two years after diagnosis and neurocognitive test performance 
in a prospective cohort of older breast cancer survivors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We enrolled breast cancer survivors with non-metastatic 
disease (n = 435) and age- and education-matched non-cancer controls (n = 441) 
between August 2010 and December 2017 and followed until January 2020; we 
excluded women with neurological disease and all women passed a cognitive screen 
at enrollment. Women completed the FACT-Cog Perceived Cognitive Impairment (PCI) 
scale and neurocognitive tests of attention, processing speed, executive 
function, learning, memory and visuospatial ability, and timed activities of 
daily living assessments at enrollment (pre-systemic treatment) and annually to 
24 months, for a total of 59 individual neurocognitive measures. We defined 
persistent self-reported cognitive decline as clinically meaningful decline 
(3.7+ points) on the PCI scale from enrollment to twelve months with persistence 
to 24 months. Analysis used four machine learning models based on data for 
change scores (baseline to twelve months) on the 59 neurocognitive measures and 
measures of depression, anxiety, and fatigue to determine a set of variables 
that distinguished the 24-month persistent cognitive decline group from 
non-cancer controls or from survivors without decline.
RESULTS: The sample of survivors and controls ranged in age from were ages 
60-89. Thirty-three percent of survivors had self-reported cognitive decline at 
twelve months and two-thirds continued to have persistent decline to 24 months 
(n = 60). Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) models 
distinguished survivors with persistent self-reported declines from controls 
(AUC = 0.736) and survivors without decline (n = 147; AUC = 0.744). The 
variables that separated groups were predominantly neurocognitive test 
performance change scores, including declines in list learning, verbal fluency, 
and attention measures.
DISCUSSION: Machine learning may be useful to further our understanding of 
cancer-related cognitive decline. Our results suggest that persistent 
self-reported cognitive problems among older women with breast cancer are 
associated with a constellation of mild neurocognitive changes warranting 
clinical attention.
164
INTRODUCTION: This work aims to explore the impacts of social support measures 
such as analyzing greening urban spaces and improving greenspace quality on the 
mental health of the elderly based on the mental resilience framework to build a 
healthy community.
METHODS: Through literature research and a questionnaire survey, this study 
designs a questionnaire including basic information, a life satisfaction scale, 
a positive and negative emotion scale, social support rating scale, a life 
orientation test-revised version, and psychological resilience scale. In order 
to classify the scales, machine learning (ML) approaches are applied in this 
work.
RESULTS: The results demonstrate great variations in the scores of the elderly 
with various health problems in the domain of psychological resilience 
(p<0.001). Social support and subjective well-being are strongly related 
(p<0.001). Additionally, positive correlations are observed among perceived, 
objective, and support use (p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Finally, it is found that psychological resilience and social 
support play a significant role in mediating mental health problems in elderly 
individuals. Therefore, social support measures such as analyzing greening urban 
spaces and improving greenspace quality can be adopted to improve the mental 
health of the elderly to build healthy communities. On this basis, this work is 
of certain reference value and practical significance for the construction of 
healthy communities and the positive influence on the mental health of elderly 
individuals.
165
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) may occur with old age and is associated with 
increased cognitive deterioration compared to what is normal. This may affect 
the person's quality of life, health, and independence. In this ageing worldwide 
context, early diagnosis and personalized assistance for MCI therefore become 
crucial. This paper makes two important contributions: (1) a system 
(RO-SmartAgeing) to address MCI, which was developed for Romania; and (2) a set 
of criteria for evaluating its impact on remote health monitoring. The system 
aims to provide customized non-invasive remote monitoring, health assessment, 
and assistance for the elderly within a smart environment set up in their homes. 
Moreover, it includes multivariate AI-based predictive models that can detect 
the onset of MCI and its development towards dementia. It was built iteratively, 
following literature reviews and consultations with health specialists, and it 
is currently being tested in a simulated home environment. While its main 
strength is the potential to detect MCI early and follow its evolution, 
RO-SmartAgeing also supports elderly people in living independently, and it is 
safe, comfortable, low cost, and privacy protected. Moreover, it can be used by 
healthcare institutions to continuously monitor a patient's vital signs, 
position, and activities, and to deliver reminders and alarms.
166
BACKGROUND: HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is effective but underused, in 
part because clinicians do not have the tools to identify PrEP candidates. We 
developed and validated an automated prediction algorithm that uses electronic 
health record (EHR) data to identify individuals at increased risk for HIV 
acquisition.
METHODS: We used machine learning algorithms to predict incident HIV infections 
with 180 potential predictors of HIV risk drawn from EHR data from 2007-15 at 
Atrius Health, an ambulatory group practice in Massachusetts, USA. We included 
EHRs of all patients aged 15 years or older with at least one clinical encounter 
during 2007-15. We used ten-fold cross-validated area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve (cv-AUC) with 95% CIs to assess the model's 
performance at identifying individuals with incident HIV and patients 
independently prescribed PrEP by clinicians. The best-performing model was 
validated prospectively with 2016 data from Atrius Health and externally with 
2011-16 data from Fenway Health, a community health centre specialising in 
sexual health care in Boston (MA, USA). We calculated HIV risk scores (ie, 
probability of an incident HIV diagnosis) for every HIV-uninfected patient not 
on PrEP during 2007-15 at Atrius Health and assessed the distribution of scores 
for thresholds to determine possible candidates for PrEP in the three study 
cohorts.
FINDINGS: We included 1 155 966 Atrius Health patients from 2007-15 (150 [<0·1%] 
patients with incident HIV) in our development cohort, 537 257 Atrius Health 
patients in 2016 (16 [<0·1%] with incident HIV) in our prospective validation 
cohort, and 33 404 Fenway Health patients from 2011-16 (423 [1·3%] with incident 
HIV) in our external validation cohort. The best-performing algorithm was 
obtained with least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) and had a 
cv-AUC of 0·86 (95% CI 0·82-0·90) for identification of incident HIV infections 
in the development cohort, 0·91 (0·81-1·00) on prospective validation, and 0·77 
(0·74-0·79) on external validation. The LASSO model successfully identified 
patients independently prescribed PrEP by clinicians at Atrius Health in 2016 
(cv-AUC 0·93, 95% CI 0·90-0·96) or Fenway Health (0·79, 0·78-0·80). HIV risk 
scores increased steeply at the 98th percentile. Using this score as a 
threshold, we prospectively identified 9515 (1·8%) of 536 384 patients at Atrius 
Health in 2016 and 4385 (15·3%) of 28 702 Fenway Health patients as potential 
PrEP candidates.
INTERPRETATION: Automated algorithms can efficiently identify patients at 
increased risk for HIV acquisition. Integrating these models into EHRs to alert 
providers about patients who might benefit from PrEP could improve prescribing 
and prevent new HIV infections.
FUNDING: Harvard University Center for AIDS Research, Providence/Boston Center 
for AIDS Research, Rhode Island IDeA-CTR, the National Institute of Mental 
Health, and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
167
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate which factors are the most strongly related to 
self-perceived health among older men and describe the shape of the association 
between the related factors and self-perceived health using machine learning.
DESIGN AND SETTING: This is a cross-sectional study within the population-based 
VAScular and Chronic Obstructive Lung disease study (VASCOL) conducted in 
southern Sweden in 2019.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 475 older men aged 73 years from the VASCOL dataset.
MEASURES: Self-perceived health was measured using the first item of the Short 
Form 12. An extreme gradient-boosting model was trained to classify 
self-perceived health as better (rated: excellent or very good) or worse (rated: 
fair or poor) using self-reported data on 19 prevalent physician-diagnosed 
health conditions, intensity of 9 symptoms and 9 demographic and lifestyle 
factors. Importance of factors was measured in SHapley Additive exPlanations 
absolute mean and higher scores correspond to greater importance.
RESULTS: The most important factors for classifying self-perceived health were: 
pain (0.629), sleep quality (0.595), breathlessness (0.549), fatigue (0.542) and 
depression (0.526). Health conditions ranked well below symptoms and lifestyle 
variables. Low levels of symptoms, good sleep quality, regular exercise, alcohol 
consumption and a body mass index between 22 and 28 were associated with better 
self-perceived health.
CONCLUSIONS: Symptoms are more strongly related to self-perceived health than 
health conditions, which suggests that the impacts of health conditions are 
mediated through symptoms, which could be important targets to improve 
self-perceived health. Machine learning offers a new way to assess composite 
constructs such as well-being or quality of life.
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
168
As the population ages, the number of older adults experiencing mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), Alzheimer's disease, and other forms of dementia will increase 
dramatically over the next few decades. Unfortunately, cognitive changes 
associated with these conditions threaten independence and quality of life. To 
address this, researchers have developed promising cognitive training 
interventions to help prevent or reverse cognitive decline and cognitive 
impairment. However, the promise of these interventions will not be realized 
unless older adults regularly engage with them over the long term, and like many 
health behaviors, adherence to cognitive training interventions can often be 
poor. To maximize training benefits, it would be useful to be able to predict 
when adherence lapses for each individual, so that support systems can be 
personalized to bolster adherence and intervention engagement at optimal time 
points. The current research uses data from a technology-based cognitive 
intervention study to recognize patterns in participants' adherence levels and 
predict their future adherence to the training program. We leveraged the feature 
learning capabilities of deep neural networks to predict patterns of adherence 
for a given participant, based on their past behavior. A separate, personalized 
model was trained for each participant to capture individualistic features of 
adherence. We posed the adherence prediction as a binary classification problem 
and exploited multivariate time series analysis using an adaptive window size 
for model training. Further, data augmentation techniques were used to overcome 
the challenge of limited training data and enhance the size of the dataset. To 
the best of our knowledge, this is the first research effort to use advanced 
machine learning techniques to predict older adults' daily adherence to 
cognitive training programs. Experimental evaluations corroborated the promise 
and potential of deep learning models for adherence prediction, which furnished 
highest mean F-scores of 75.5, 75.5, and 74.6% for the Convolution Neural 
Network (CNN), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network, and CNN-LSTM models 
respectively.
169
Literature suggests that anxiety affects gait and balance among young adults. 
However, previous studies using machine learning (ML) have only used gait to 
identify individuals who report feeling anxious. Therefore, the purpose of this 
study was to identify individuals who report feeling anxious at that time using 
a combination of gait and quiet balance ML. Using a cross-sectional design, 
participants (n = 88) completed the Profile of Mood Survey-Short Form (POMS-SF) 
to measure current feelings of anxiety and were then asked to complete a 
modified Clinical Test for Sensory Interaction in Balance (mCTSIB) and a 
two-minute walk around a 6 m track while wearing nine APDM mobility sensors. 
Results from our study finds that Random Forest classifiers had the highest 
median accuracy rate (75%) and the five top features for identifying anxious 
individuals were all gait parameters (turn angles, variance in neck, lumbar 
rotation, lumbar movement in the sagittal plane, and arm movement). Post-hoc 
analyses suggest that individuals who reported feeling anxious also walked using 
gait patterns most similar to older individuals who are fearful of falling. 
Additionally, we find that individuals who are anxious also had less postural 
stability when they had visual input; however, these individuals had less 
movement during postural sway when visual input was removed.
170
BACKGROUND: Depression remains the second leading cause of disability worldwide. 
Symptoms of depression are expressed and experienced differently across cultural 
groups, impacting treatment decisions. Patient preferences predict service 
utilization, treatment selection and persistence, as well as health outcomes for 
medical and behavioral health conditions, including depression. We identified 
depression management preferences of Alaska Native and American Indian (AN/AI) 
people who receive care within a comprehensive, integrated, tribally owned and 
operated healthcare facility in Anchorage, Alaska.
METHODS: Adult AN/AI patients who screened positive for depression (10 or 
greater on the Patient Health Questionnaire - 9 (PHQ-9)) completed a 
culturally-tailored decision-support tool to assess their depression management 
interests.
RESULTS: The 125 eligible patients, who screened positive for depression, 
preferred counseling and medications to peer support groups, herbal remedies, 
and spiritual support. Those 18-39 years of age were more likely to prefer 
medications and less likely to prefer spirituality and peer support than those 
40 years of age and older. Patients with moderate and severe depression were 
more likely to prefer exercise, healthy eating, and stress reduction than 
individuals with mild depression.
LIMITATIONS: Women comprised 78% of the sample. Responses may not adequately 
represent the views of men.
CONCLUSIONS: Counseling and medications should consistently be made available 
earlier in the course of depression management. Patient interest in exercise, 
stress reduction, and healthy eating to manage depression, especially among 
those with moderate and severe depression, offers opportunity for additional 
collaboration in an integrated care setting.
171
In-home monitoring systems have been used to detect cognitive decline in older 
adults by allowing continuous monitoring of routine activities. In this study, 
we investigated whether unobtrusive in-house power monitoring technologies could 
be used to predict cognitive impairment. A total of 94 older adults aged ≥65 
years were enrolled in this study. Generalized linear mixed models with 
subject-specific random intercepts were used to evaluate differences in the 
usage time of home appliances between people with and without cognitive 
impairment. Three independent power monitoring parameters representing activity 
behavior were found to be associated with cognitive impairment. Representative 
values of mean differences between those with cognitive impairment relative to 
those without were -13.5 min for induction heating in the spring, -1.80 min for 
microwave oven in the winter, and -0.82 h for air conditioner in the winter. We 
developed two prediction models for cognitive impairment, one with power 
monitoring data and the other without, and found that the former had better 
predictive ability (accuracy, 0.82; sensitivity, 0.48; specificity, 0.96) 
compared to the latter (accuracy, 0.76; sensitivity, 0.30; specificity, 0.95). 
In summary, in-house power monitoring technologies can be used to detect 
cognitive impairment.
172
BACKGROUND: Recent trends show methamphetamine use is increasing in the United 
States. American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities face health 
disparities compared to the population overall, including some of the highest 
rates of illegal drug use. Herein, we examined the prevalence of methamphetamine 
use among AI/ANs and characteristics associated with methamphetamine use among 
AI/AN people.
METHODS: We examined past-year methamphetamine use from 2015 to 2019 between 
AI/ANs and the general non-institutionalized U.S. population using the National 
Survey of Drug Use and Health. Then, we identify potential subgroups of AI/AN 
people at elevated risk of methamphetamine use across factors including 
demographic, social determinants, mental health, and co-occurring substance use.
RESULTS: A total of 214,505 people, aged 18 or older, were surveyed between 2015 
and 2019; 3,075 (0.55%) identified as AI/AN. An estimated 26.2 out of every 1000 
AI/ANs used methamphetamine compared to 6.8 out of every 1000 in the general 
U.S.
POPULATION: Compared to methamphetamine use in the general population, AI/AN 
methamphetamine use tends to cluster in rural areas and among those with low 
income. AI/ANs who use methamphetamine were more likely to be male, middle-aged, 
low income, have severe mental illness, and misuse other substances than AI/AN 
people who did not use methamphetamine.
DISCUSSION: AI/ANs experience a disproportionate amount of methamphetamine use 
in the U.S. To address this disparity, multifaceted, broad prevention, harm 
reduction, and treatment efforts are needed that leverage cultural strengths to 
mitigate the consequences of methamphetamine use.
173
BACKGROUND: Speech and language cues are considered significant data sources 
that can reveal insights into one's behavior and well-being. The goal of this 
study is to evaluate how different machine learning (ML) classifiers trained 
both on the spoken word and acoustic features during live conversations between 
family caregivers and a therapist, correlate to anxiety and quality of life 
(QoL) as assessed by validated instruments.
METHODS: The dataset comprised of 124 audio-recorded and professionally 
transcribed discussions between family caregivers of hospice patients and a 
therapist, of challenges they faced in their caregiving role, and standardized 
assessments of self-reported QoL and anxiety. We custom-built and trained an 
Automated Speech Recognition (ASR) system on older adult voices and created a 
logistic regression-based classifier that incorporated audio-based features. The 
classification process automated the QoL scoring and display of the score in 
real time, replacing hand-coding for self-reported assessments with a machine 
learning identified classifier.
FINDINGS: Of the 124 audio files and their transcripts, 87 of these transcripts 
(70%) were selected to serve as the training set, holding the remaining 30% of 
the data for evaluation. For anxiety, the results of adding the dimension of 
sound and an automated speech-to-text transcription outperformed the prior 
classifier trained only on human-rendered transcriptions. Specifically, 
precision improved from 86% to 92%, accuracy from 81% to 89%, and recall from 
78% to 88%.
INTERPRETATION: Classifiers can be developed through ML techniques which can 
indicate improvements in QoL measures with a reasonable degree of accuracy. 
Examining the content, sound of the voice and context of the conversation 
provides insights into additional factors affecting anxiety and QoL that could 
be addressed in tailored therapy and the design of conversational agents serving 
as therapy chatbots.
174
Dementia is increasing day-by-day in older adults. Many of them are spending 
their life joyfully due to smart home technologies. Smart homes contain several 
smart devices which can support living at home. Automated assessment of smart 
home residents is a significant aspect of smart home technology. Detecting 
dementia in older adults in the early stage is the basic need of this time. 
Existing technologies can detect dementia timely but lacks performance. In this 
paper, we proposed an automated cognitive health assessment approach using 
machines and deep learning based on daily life activities. To validate our 
approach, we use CASAS publicly available daily life activities dataset for 
experiments where residents perform their routine activities in a smart home. We 
use four machine learning algorithms: decision tree (DT), Naive Bayes (NB), 
support vector machine (SVM), and multilayer perceptron (MLP). Furthermore, we 
use deep neural network (DNN) for healthy and dementia classification. 
Experiments reveal the 96% accuracy using the MLP classifier. This study 
suggests using machine learning classifiers for better dementia detection, 
specifically for the dataset which contains real-world data.
175
BACKGROUND: Although geriatric depression is prevalent, diagnosis using 
self-reporting instruments has limitations when measuring the depressed mood of 
older adults in a community setting. Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) by 
using wearable devices could be used to collect data to classify older adults 
into depression groups.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to develop a machine learning 
algorithm to predict the classification of depression groups among older adults 
living alone. We focused on utilizing diverse data collected through a survey, 
an Actiwatch, and an EMA report related to depression.
METHODS: The prediction model using machine learning was developed in 4 steps: 
(1) data collection, (2) data processing and representation, (3) data modeling 
(feature engineering and selection), and (4) training and validation to test the 
prediction model. Older adults (N=47), living alone in community settings, 
completed an EMA to report depressed moods 4 times a day for 2 weeks between May 
2017 and January 2018. Participants wore an Actiwatch that measured their 
activity and ambient light exposure every 30 seconds for 2 weeks. At baseline 
and the end of the 2-week observation, depressive symptoms were assessed using 
the Korean versions of the Short Geriatric Depression Scale (SGDS-K) and the 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (K-HDRS). Conventional classification based on 
binary logistic regression was built and compared with 4 machine learning models 
(the logit, decision tree, boosted trees, and random forest models).
RESULTS: On the basis of the SGDS-K and K-HDRS, 38% (18/47) of the participants 
were classified into the probable depression group. They reported significantly 
lower scores of normal mood and physical activity and higher levels of white and 
red, green, and blue (RGB) light exposures at different degrees of various 
4-hour time frames (all P<.05). Sleep efficiency was chosen for modeling through 
feature selection. Comparing diverse combinations of the selected variables, 
daily mean EMA score, daily mean activity level, white and RGB light at 4:00 pm 
to 8:00 pm exposure, and daily sleep efficiency were selected for modeling. 
Conventional classification based on binary logistic regression had a good model 
fit (accuracy: 0.705; precision: 0.770; specificity: 0.859; and area under 
receiver operating characteristic curve or AUC: 0.754). Among the 4 machine 
learning models, the logit model had the best fit compared with the others 
(accuracy: 0.910; precision: 0.929; specificity: 0.940; and AUC: 0.960).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides preliminary evidence for developing a machine 
learning program to predict the classification of depression groups in older 
adults living alone. Clinicians should consider using this method to identify 
underdiagnosed subgroups and monitor daily progression regarding treatment or 
therapeutic intervention in the community setting. Furthermore, more efforts are 
needed for researchers and clinicians to diversify data collection methods by 
using a survey, EMA, and a sensor.
Originally published in JMIR Mhealth and Uhealth (http://mhealth.jmir.org), 
176
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To develop and test the performance of the Positive 
Aβ Risk Score (PARS) for prediction of β-amyloid (Aβ) positivity in cognitively 
unimpaired individuals for use in clinical research. Detecting Aβ positivity is 
essential for identifying at-risk individuals who are candidates for early 
intervention with amyloid targeted treatments.
METHODS: We used data from 4,134 cognitively normal individuals from the 
Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer's (A4) Study. The sample was 
divided into training and test sets. A modified version of AutoScore, a machine 
learning-based software tool, was used to develop a scoring system using the 
training set. Three risk scores were developed using candidate predictors in 
various combinations from the following categories: demographics (age, sex, 
education, race, family history, body mass index, marital status, and 
ethnicity), subjective measures (Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study 
Activities of Daily Living-Prevention Instrument, Geriatric Depression Scale, 
and Memory Complaint Questionnaire), objective measures (free recall, 
Mini-Mental State Examination, immediate recall, digit symbol substitution, and 
delayed logical memory scores), and APOE4 status. Performance of the risk scores 
was evaluated in the independent test set.
RESULTS: PARS model 1 included age, body mass index (BMI), and family history 
and had an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.60 (95% CI 0.57-0.64). PARS model 2 
included free recall in addition to the PARS model 1 variables and had an AUC of 
0.61 (0.58-0.64). PARS model 3, which consisted of age, BMI, and APOE4 
information, had an AUC of 0.73 (0.70-0.76). PARS model 3 showed the highest, 
but still moderate, performance metrics in comparison with other models with 
sensitivity of 72.0% (67.6%-76.4%), specificity of 62.1% (58.8%-65.4%), accuracy 
of 65.3% (62.7%-68.0%), and positive predictive value of 48.1% (44.1%-52.1%).
DISCUSSION: PARS models are a set of simple and practical risk scores that may 
improve our ability to identify individuals more likely to be amyloid positive. 
The models can potentially be used to enrich trials and serve as a screening 
step in research settings. This approach can be followed by the use of 
additional variables for the development of improved risk scores.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class II evidence that in 
cognitively unimpaired individuals PARS models predict Aβ positivity with 
moderate accuracy.
177
BACKGROUND: Certain neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS), namely apathy, depression, 
and anxiety demonstrated great value in predicting dementia progression, 
representing eventually an opportunity window for timely diagnosis and 
treatment. However, sensitive and objective markers of these symptoms are still 
missing. Therefore, the present study aims to investigate the association 
between automatically extracted speech features and NPS in patients with mild 
neurocognitive disorders.
METHODS: Speech of 141 patients aged 65 or older with neurocognitive disorder 
was recorded while performing two short narrative speech tasks. NPS were 
assessed by the neuropsychiatric inventory. Paralinguistic markers relating to 
prosodic, formant, source, and temporal qualities of speech were automatically 
extracted, correlated with NPS. Machine learning experiments were carried out to 
validate the diagnostic power of extracted markers.
RESULTS: Different speech variables are associated with specific NPS; apathy 
correlates with temporal aspects, and anxiety with voice quality-and this was 
mostly consistent between male and female after correction for cognitive 
impairment. Machine learning regressors are able to extract information from 
speech features and perform above baseline in predicting anxiety, apathy, and 
depression scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Different NPS seem to be characterized by distinct speech features, 
which are easily extractable automatically from short vocal tasks. These 
findings support the use of speech analysis for detecting subtypes of NPS in 
patients with cognitive impairment. This could have great implications for the 
design of future clinical trials as this cost-effective method could allow more 
continuous and even remote monitoring of symptoms.
178
Globally, one of the biggest problems with the increase in the elderly 
population is dementia. However, dementia still has no fundamental cure. 
Therefore, it is important to predict and prevent dementia early. For early 
prediction of dementia, it is crucial to find dementia risk factors that 
increase a person's risk of developing dementia. In this paper, the subject of 
dementia risk factor analysis and discovery studies were limited to gender, 
because it is assumed that the difference in the prevalence of dementia in men 
and women will lead to differences in the risk factors for dementia among men 
and women. This study analyzed the Korean National Health Information 
System-Senior Cohort using machine-learning techniques. By using the 
machine-learning technique, it was possible to reveal a very small causal 
relationship between data that are ignored using existing statistical 
techniques. By using the senior cohort, it was possible to analyze 6000 data 
that matched the experimental conditions out of 558,147 sample subjects over 14 
years. In order to analyze the difference in dementia risk factors between men 
and women, three machine-learning-based dementia risk factor analysis models 
were constructed and compared. As a result of the experiment, it was found that 
the risk factors for dementia in men and women are different. In addition, not 
only did the results include most of the known dementia risk factors, previously 
unknown candidates for dementia risk factors were also identified. We hope that 
our research will be helpful in finding new dementia risk factors.
179
BACKGROUND: Suicide messages can be transmitted infinitely online; the Internet 
is influential in suicide prevention. Identifying suicide risks online via 
artificial technological advances may help predict suicide.
METHODS: We built a classifier that detects open messages containing suicidal 
ideation or behavior-related words in social media via text mining methods and 
developed the Monitoring-Tracking-Rescuing model, which links data monitoring 
and tracking to high-risk suicide rescues. Natural language processing (NLP) 
techniques such as Long Short-Term Memory and Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers were applied to online posts of common social 
media sites in Taiwan. This model uses a two-step high-risk identification 
procedure: an automatic prediction process using NLP to classify suicide-risk 
levels, followed by professional validation by a senior psychiatrist and a 
nursing faculty specialized in suicidology.
RESULTS: From a dataset containing 404 high-risk and 2226 no- or low-risk 
articles, the sensitivity and specificity of our model reached 80 %.
LIMITATIONS: The model is limited to data platforms that can be "crawled" and 
excludes suicide-risk content from graphics, video and audio files. 
Additionally, machine learning does not provide the best recognition rate from 
complex online messages. Keywords for high-risk suicide in long articles are 
difficult to interpret using this model. Finally, the model lacks keywords for 
suicide-protective factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Artificial intelligence techniques may help detect and monitor 
high-risk suicide posts and inform mental health professionals of these posts. 
Periodic tracking plus manual validation to determine risk levels are 
recommended to enhance the reliability and effectiveness of Internet 
suicide-prevention tasks.
180
BACKGROUND: As life expectancy grows, so do the challenges of caring for an 
aging population. Older adults, including people with dementia, want to live 
independently and feel in control of their lives for as long as possible. 
Assistive technologies powered by artificial intelligence and internet of things 
devices are being proposed to provide living environments that support the 
users' safety, psychological, and medical needs through remote monitoring and 
interventions.
OBJECTIVE: This study investigates the functional, psychosocial, and 
environmental needs of people living with dementia, their caregivers, 
clinicians, and health and social care service providers toward the design and 
implementation of smart home systems.
METHODS: We used an iterative user-centered design approach comprising 9 
substudies. First, semistructured interviews (9 people with dementia, 9 
caregivers, and 10 academic and clinical staff) and workshops (35 pairs of 
people with dementia and caregivers, and 12 health and social care clinicians) 
were conducted to define the needs of people with dementia, home caregivers, and 
professional stakeholders in both daily activities and technology-specific 
interactions. Then, the spectrum of needs identified was represented via 
patient-caregiver personas and discussed with stakeholders in a workshop (14 
occupational therapists; 4 National Health Service pathway directors; and 6 
researchers in occupational therapy, neuropsychiatry, and engineering) and 2 
focus groups with managers of health care services (n=8), eliciting 
opportunities for innovative care technologies and public health strategies. 
Finally, these design opportunities were discussed in semistructured interviews 
with participants of a smart home trial involving environmental sensors, 
physiological measurement devices, smartwatches, and tablet-based chatbots and 
cognitive assessment puzzles (10 caregivers and 2 people with dementia). A 
thematic analysis revealed factors that motivate household members to use these 
technologies.
RESULTS: Outcomes of these activities include a qualitative and quantitative 
analysis of patient, caregiver, and clinician needs and the identification of 
challenges and opportunities for the design and implementation of remote 
monitoring systems in public health pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Participatory design methods supported the triangulation of 
stakeholder perspectives to aid the development of more patient-centered 
interventions and their translation to clinical practice and public health 
strategy. We discuss the implications and limitations of our findings, the value 
and the applicability of our methodology, and directions for future research.
Serban, Sarah J C Daniels, Rafael A Calvo. Originally published in JMIR Aging 
181
Delirium is a psycho-organic syndrome common in hospitalized patients, 
especially the elderly, and is associated with poor clinical outcomes. This 
study aims to identify the predictors that are mostly associated with the risk 
of delirium episodes using a machine learning technique (MLT). A random forest 
(RF) algorithm was used to evaluate the association between the subject's 
characteristics and the 4AT (the 4 A's test) score screening tool for delirium. 
RF algorithm was implemented using information based on demographic 
characteristics, comorbidities, drugs and procedures. Of the 78 patients 
enrolled in the study, 49 (63%) were at risk for delirium, 32 (41%) had at least 
one episode of delirium during the hospitalization (38% in orthopedics and 31% 
both in internal medicine and in the geriatric ward). The model explained 75.8% 
of the variability of the 4AT score with a root mean squared error of 3.29. 
Higher age, the presence of dementia, physical restraint, diabetes and a lower 
degree are the variables associated with an increase of the 4AT score. Random 
forest is a valid method for investigating the patients' characteristics 
associated with delirium onset also in small case-series. The use of this model 
may allow for early detection of delirium onset to plan the proper adjustment in 
healthcare assistance.
182
Elderly people affected by Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) usually report a 
perceived decline in cognitive functions that deeply impacts their quality of 
life. This subtle waning, although it cannot be diagnosable as dementia, is 
noted by caregivers on the basis of their relative's behaviors. Crucially, if 
this condition is also not detected in time by clinicians, it can easily turn 
into dementia. Thus, early detection of MCI is strongly needed. Classical 
neuropsychological measures - underlying a categorical model of diagnosis - 
could be integrated with a dimensional assessment approach involving Virtual 
Reality (VR) and Artificial Intelligence (AI). VR can be used to create highly 
ecologically controlled simulations resembling the daily life contexts in which 
patients' daily instrumental activities (IADL) usually take place. Clinicians 
can record patients' kinematics, particularly gait, while performing IADL 
(Digital Biomarkers). Then, Artificial Intelligence employs Machine Learning 
(ML) to analyze them in combination with clinical and neuropsychological data. 
This integrated computational approach would enable the creation of a predictive 
model to identify specific patterns of cognitive and motor impairment in MCI. 
Therefore, this new dimensional cognitive-behavioral assessment would reveal 
elderly people's neural alterations and impaired cognitive functions, typical of 
MCI and dementia, even in early stages for more time-sensitive interventions.
183
This study used machine-learning algorithms to make unbiased estimates of the 
relative importance of various multilevel data for classifying cases with 
schizophrenia (n = 60), schizoaffective disorder (n = 19), bipolar disorder 
(n = 20), unipolar depression (n = 14), and healthy controls (n = 51) into 
psychiatric diagnostic categories. The Random Forest machine learning algorithm, 
which showed best efficacy (92.9% SD: 0.06), was used to generate variable 
importance ranking of positive, negative, and general psychopathology symptoms, 
cognitive indexes, global assessment of function (GAF), and parental ages at 
birth for sorting participants into diagnostic categories. Symptoms were ranked 
most influential for separating cases from healthy controls, followed by 
cognition and maternal age. To separate schizophrenia/schizoaffective disorder 
from bipolar/unipolar depression, GAF was most influential, followed by 
cognition and paternal age. For classifying schizophrenia from all other 
psychiatric disorders, low GAF and paternal age were similarly important, 
followed by cognition, psychopathology and maternal age. Controls misclassified 
as schizophrenia cases showed lower nonverbal abilities, mild negative and 
general psychopathology symptoms, and younger maternal or older paternal age. 
The importance of symptoms for classification of cases and lower GAF for 
diagnosing schizophrenia, notably more important and distinct from cognition and 
symptoms, concurs with current practices. The high importance of parental ages 
is noteworthy and merits further study.
184
Background: Neuroscience lacks a reliable method of screening the early stages 
of dementia. Objective: To improve the diagnostics of age-related cognitive 
functions by developing insight into the proportionality of age-related changes 
in cognitive subdomains. Materials and Methods: We composed a battery of 
psychophysiological tests and collected an open-access psychophysiological 
outcomes of brain atrophy (POBA) dataset by testing individuals without 
dementia. To extend the utility of machine learning (ML) classification in 
cognitive studies, we proposed estimates of the disproportional changes in 
cognitive functions: an index of simple reaction time to decision-making time 
(ISD), ISD with the accuracy performance (ISDA), and an index of performance in 
simple and complex visual-motor reaction with account for accuracy (ISCA). 
Studying the distribution of the values of the indices over age allowed us to 
verify whether diverse cognitive functions decline equally throughout life or 
there is a divergence in age-related cognitive changes. Results: Unsupervised ML 
clustering shows that the optimal number of homogeneous age groups is four. The 
sample is segregated into the following age-groups: Adolescents ∈ [0, 20), Young 
adults ∈ [20, 40), Midlife adults ∈ [40, 60) and Older adults ≥60 year of age. 
For ISD, ISDA, and ISCA values, only the median of the Adolescents group is 
different from that of the other three age-groups sharing a similar distribution 
pattern (p > 0.01). After neurodevelopment and maturation, the indices preserve 
almost constant values with a slight trend toward functional decline. The 
reaction to a moving object (RMO) test results (RMO_mean) follow another 
tendency. The Midlife adults group's median significantly differs from the 
remaining three age subsamples (p < 0.01). No general trend in age-related 
changes of this dependent variable is observed. For all the data (ISD, ISDA, 
ISCA, and RMO_mean), Levene's test reveals no significant changes of the 
variances in age-groups (p > 0.05). Homoscedasticity also supports our 
assumption about a linear dependency between the observed features and age. 
Conclusion: In healthy brain aging, there are proportional age-related changes 
in the time estimates of information processing speed and inhibitory control in 
task switching. Future studies should test patients with dementia to determine 
whether the changes of the aforementioned indicators follow different patterns.
185
BACKGROUND: Depression is a common mental health problem among veterans, with 
high mortality. Despite the numerous conducted investigations, the prediction 
and identification of risk factors for depression are still severely limited. 
This study used a deep learning algorithm to identify depression in veterans and 
its factors associated with clinical manifestations.
METHODS: Our data originated from the National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (2005-2018). A dataset of 2,546 veterans was identified using deep 
learning and five traditional machine learning algorithms with 10-fold 
cross-validation. Model performance was assessed by examining the area under the 
subject operating characteristic curve (AUC), accuracy, recall, specificity, 
precision, and F1 score.
RESULTS: Deep learning had the highest AUC (0.891, 95%CI 0.869-0.914) and 
specificity (0.906) in identifying depression in veterans. Further study on 
depression among veterans of different ages showed that the AUC values for deep 
learning were 0.929 (95%CI 0.904-0.955) in the middle-aged group and 0.924(95%CI 
0.900-0.948) in the older age group. In addition to general health conditions, 
sleep difficulties, memory impairment, work incapacity, income, BMI, and chronic 
diseases, factors such as vitamins E and C, and palmitic acid were also 
identified as important influencing factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with traditional machine learning methods, deep learning 
algorithms achieved optimal performance, making it conducive for identifying 
depression and its risk factors among veterans.
186
Objectives: Relatively little is known about who uses various types of 
meditation or how health problems and health care barriers might simultaneously 
impact its use. This article describes the current prevalence of meditation and 
identifies significant individual and health system-related factors associated 
with its use. Design: Cross-sectional descriptive analysis of the 2017 National 
Health Interview Survey analyzed in 2019. Setting/Location: United States. 
Subjects: The adult, civilian, noninstitutionalized U.S. population. Outcome 
measures: Self-reported use of any type of meditation in past year (mantra, 
mindfulness, spiritual, guided imagery, and progressive relaxation) or as part 
of yoga or t'ai chi practice. Control variables included demographic 
characteristics, health status, risk behaviors, and health system-related 
factors (self-reported barriers and facilitators to health care access) 
hypothesized to be associated with greater meditation use. Results: Over 46 
million people (19% of the adult, civilian, noninstitutionalized U.S. 
population) currently practice some type of meditation. Three main factors 
predict meditation use: the presence of a health problem (chronic disease, pain, 
anxiety/depression, and sleeping problems), cost or access barriers to 
conventional medical care, and individual characteristics (younger age, female 
sex, and sexual minority status). Conclusions: Meditation is one of the most 
common forms of complementary and alternative medicine in the United States 
today. While its health benefits are still emerging, public health practitioners 
and clinicians should be aware of the increasing use of these therapies to treat 
common health problems, their relatively low prevalence among some groups that 
might benefit from them (such as older people, those with less healthy 
lifestyles, and men), and their higher use among those who face barriers to 
obtaining conventional care.
187
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to explore the long-term cognitive trajectories and 
its' determinants, and construct prediction models for identifying high-risk 
populations with unfavorable cognitive trajectories.
METHODS: This study included 3502 older adults aged 65-105 years at their first 
observations in a 16-year longitudinal cohort study. Cognitive function was 
measured by the Chinese version Mini Mental State Examination. The heterogeneity 
of cognitive function was identified through mixed growth model. Machine 
learning algorithms, namely regularized logistic regression (r-LR), support 
vector machine (SVM), random forest (RF), and super learner (SL) were used to 
predict cognitive trajectories. Discrimination and calibration metrics were used 
for performance evaluation.
RESULTS: Two distinct trajectories were identified according to the changes of 
MMSE scores: intact cognitive functioning (93.6%), and dementia (6.4%). Older 
age, female gender, Han ethnicity, having no schooling, rural residents, 
low-frequency leisure activities, and low baseline BADL score were associated 
with a rapid decline in cognitive function. r-LR, SVM, and SL performed well in 
predicting cognitive trajectories (Sensitivity: 0.73, G-mean: 0.65). Age and 
psychological well-being were key predictors.
CONCLUSION: Two cognitive trajectories were identified among older Chinese, and 
the identified key factors could be targeted for constructing early risk 
prediction models.
188
BACKGROUND: Individuals living with long-term physical health conditions 
frequently experience co-occurring mental health problems. This comorbidity has 
a significant impact on an individual's levels of emotional distress, health 
outcomes, and associated health care utilization. As health care services 
struggle to meet demand and care increasingly moves to the community, digital 
tools are being promoted to support patients to self-manage their health. One 
such technology is the autonomous virtual agent (chatbot, conversational agent), 
which uses artificial intelligence (AI) to process the user's written or spoken 
natural language and then to select or construct the corresponding appropriate 
responses.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to co-design the content, functionality, and 
interface modalities of an autonomous virtual agent to support self-management 
for patients with an exemplar long-term condition (LTC; chronic pulmonary 
obstructive disease [COPD]) and then to assess the acceptability and system 
content.
METHODS: We conducted 2 co-design workshops and a proof-of-concept 
implementation of an autonomous virtual agent with natural language processing 
capabilities. This implementation formed the basis for video-based scenario 
testing of acceptability with adults with a diagnosis of COPD and health 
professionals involved in their care.
RESULTS: Adults (n=6) with a diagnosis of COPD and health professionals (n=5) 
specified 4 priority self-management scenarios for which they would like to 
receive support: at the time of diagnosis (information provision), during acute 
exacerbations (crisis support), during periods of low mood (emotional support), 
and for general self-management (motivation). From the scenario testing, 12 
additional adults with COPD felt the system to be both acceptable and engaging, 
particularly with regard to internet-of-things capabilities. They felt the 
system would be particularly useful for individuals living alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients did not explicitly separate mental and physical health 
needs, although the content they developed for the virtual agent had a clear 
psychological approach. Supported self-management delivered via an autonomous 
virtual agent was acceptable to the participants. A co-design process has 
allowed the research team to identify key design principles, content, and 
functionality to underpin an autonomous agent for delivering self-management 
support to older adults living with COPD and potentially other LTCs.
Cheryl Grindell, Bahman Mirheidari, Scott Weich, Luc de Witte, Daniel 
189
Gait and physical fitness are related to cognitive function. A decrease in motor 
function and physical fitness can serve as an indicator of declining global 
cognitive function in older adults. This study aims to use machine learning (ML) 
to identify important features of gait and physical fitness to predict a decline 
in global cognitive function in older adults. A total of three hundred and six 
participants aged seventy-five years or older were included in the study, and 
their gait performance at various speeds and physical fitness were evaluated. 
Eight ML models were applied to data ranked by the p-value (LP) of linear 
regression and the importance gain (XI) of XGboost. Five optimal features were 
selected using elastic net on the LP data for men, and twenty optimal features 
were selected using support vector machine on the XI data for women. Thus, the 
important features for predicting a potential decline in global cognitive 
function in older adults were successfully identified herein. The proposed ML 
approach could inspire future studies on the early detection and prevention of 
cognitive function decline in older adults.
190
The study aimed to: (1) Identify distinct trajectories of change in depressive 
symptoms by mid-treatment during psychotherapy for late-life depression with 
executive dysfunction; (2) examine if nonresponse by mid-treatment predicted 
poor response at treatment end; and (3) identify baseline characteristics 
predicting an early nonresponse trajectory by mid-treatment. A sample of 221 
adults 60 years and older with major depression and executive dysfunction were 
randomized to 12 weeks of either problem-solving therapy or supportive therapy. 
We used Latent Growth Mixture Models (LGMM) to detect subgroups with distinct 
trajectories of change in depression by mid-treatment (6th week). We conducted 
regression analyses with LGMM subgroups as predictors of response at treatment 
end. We used random forest machine learning algorithms to identify baseline 
predictors of LGMM trajectories. We found that ~77.5% of participants had a 
declining trajectory of depression in weeks 0-6, while the remaining 22.5% had a 
persisting depression trajectory, with no treatment differences. The LGMM 
trajectories predicted remission and response at treatment end. A random forests 
model with high prediction accuracy (80%) showed that the strongest modifiable 
predictors of the persisting depression trajectory were low perceived social 
support, followed by high neuroticism, low treatment expectancy, and low 
perception of the therapist as accepting. Our results suggest that modifiable 
risk factors of early nonresponse to psychotherapy can be identified at the 
outset of treatment and addressed with targeted personalized interventions. 
Therapists may focus on increasing meaningful social interactions, addressing 
concerns related to treatment benefits, and creating a positive working 
relationship.
191
BACKGROUND: Anxiety, depression, and dementia are important issues affecting the 
mental health of the older population. Given the relationship between mental 
health and physical disorders, it is particularly important to diagnose and 
identify these psychological problems in older people.
METHODS: Psychological data of 15,173 older people living in various districts 
and counties of Shanxi province, China, were extracted from data collected 
through the '13th Five-Year Plan for Healthy Aging-Psychological Care for the 
Elderly Project' of the National Health Commission of China in 2019. Three 
different ensemble learning classifiers [random forest (RF), Extreme Gradient 
Boosting (XGBoost) and Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM)] were 
evaluated, and the best classifier with the selected feature set was selected. 
The ratio of training to testing cases was 8:2. The predictive performance of 
the three classifiers was evaluated by calculating the area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve (AUC), accuracy, recall, and F measurement based 
on 10-fold cross-validation and ranked by AUC.
RESULTS: All the three classifiers have achieved good prediction results. In the 
test set, the AUC value range for the three classifiers was 0.79 to 0.85. The 
LightGBM algorithm showed higher accuracy than both the baseline and XGBoost. A 
new machine learning (ML)-based model to predict mental health problems in older 
people was constructed. The model was interpretative and could hierarchically 
predict psychological problems including anxiety, depression, and dementia in 
older people. Experimental results showed that the method could accurately 
identify those suffering from anxiety, depression, and dementia in different age 
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: A simple method model was designed based on only eight problems, 
which had good accuracy and was widely applicable to the older of all ages. 
Overall, this research approach avoided the need to identify older people with 
poor mental health through the traditional standardized questionnaire approach.
2023 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.
192
This epidemiological study aimed to develop an X-AI that could explain groups 
with a high anxiety disorder risk in old age. To achieve this objective, (1) 
this study explored the predictors of senile anxiety using base models and meta 
models. (2) This study presented decision tree visualization that could help 
psychiatric consultants and primary physicians easily interpret the path of 
predicting high-risk groups based on major predictors derived from final machine 
learning models with the best performance. This study analyzed 1558 elderly (695 
males and 863 females) who were 60 years or older and completed the Zung's 
Self-Rating Anxiety Scale (SAS). We used support vector machine (SVM), random 
forest, LightGBM, and Adaboost for the base model, a single predictive model, 
while using XGBoost algorithm for the meta model. The analysis results confirmed 
that the predictive performance of the "SVM + Random forest + LightGBM + 
AdaBoost + XGBoost model (stacking ensemble: accuracy 87.4%, precision 85.1%, 
recall 87.4%, and F1-score 85.5%)" was the best. Also, the results of this study 
showed that the elderly who often (or mostly) felt subjective loneliness, had a 
Self Esteem Scale score of 26 or less, and had a subjective communication with 
their family of 4 or less (on a 10-point scale) were the group with the highest 
risk anxiety disorder. The results of this study imply that it is necessary to 
establish a community-based mental health policy that can identify elderly 
groups with high anxiety risks based on multiple risk factors and manage them 
constantly.
193
This study aimed to identify subgroups of depressed older adults with distinct 
trajectories of suicidal ideation during brief psychotherapy and to detect 
modifiable predictors of membership to the trajectories of suicidal ideation. 
Latent growth mixed models were used to identify trajectories of the presence of 
suicidal ideation in participants to a randomized controlled trial comparing 
Problem Solving Therapy with "Engage" therapy in older adults with major 
depression over 9 weeks. Predictors of membership to trajectories of suicidal 
ideation were identified by the convergence of four machine learning models, 
i.e., least absolute shrinkage and selection operator logistic regression, 
random forest, gradient boosting machine, and classification tree. The course of 
suicidal ideation was best captured by two trajectories, a favorable and an 
unfavorable trajectory comprising 173 and 76 participants respectively. Members 
of the favorable trajectory had no suicidal ideation by week 8. In contrast, 
members of the unfavorable trajectory had a 60% probability of suicidal ideation 
by treatment end. Convergent findings of the four machine learning models 
identified hopelessness, neuroticism, and low general self-efficacy as the 
strongest predictors of membership to the unfavorable trajectory of suicidal 
ideation during psychotherapy. Assessment of suicide risk should include 
hopelessness, neuroticism, and general self-efficacy as they are predictors of 
an unfavorable course of suicidal ideation in depressed older adults receiving 
psychotherapy. Psychotherapeutic interventions exist for hopelessness, emotional 
reactivity related to neuroticism, and low self-efficacy, and if used during 
therapy, may improve the course of suicidal ideation.
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.
194
Purpose study: Alzheimer is a type of dementia that usually affects older adults 
by creating memory loss due to damaged brain cells. The damaged brain cells lead 
to shrinkage in the size of the brain and it is very difficult to extract the 
grey matter (GM) and white matter (WM). The segmentation of GM and WM is a 
challenging task due to its homogeneous nature between the neighborhood tissues. 
In this proposed system, an attempt has been made to extract GM and WM tissues 
using optimization-based segmentation techniques.Materials and methods: The 
optimization method is considered for the classification of normal and alzheimer 
disease (ad) through magnetic resonance images (mri) using a modified cuckoo 
search algorithm. Gray Level Co-Occurrence Matrix (GLCM) features are calculated 
from the extracted GM and WM. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is adopted for 
selecting the best features from the GLCM features. Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
is a classifier which is used to classify the normal and abnormal images. 
Results: The proposed optimization algorithm provides most promising and 
efficient level of image segmentation compared to fuzzy c means (fcm), otsu, 
particle swarm optimization (pso) and cuckoo search (cs). The modified cuckoo 
yields high accuracy of 96%, sensitivity of 97% and specificity of 94% than 
other methods due to its powerful searching potential for the proper 
identification of gray and WM tissues.Conclusions: The results of the 
classification process proved the effectiveness of the proposed technique in 
identifying alzheimer affected patients due to its very strong optimization 
ability. The proposed pipeline helps to diagnose early detection of AD and 
better assessment of the neuroprotective effect of a therapy.
195
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative illnesses 
(dementia) among the elderly. Recently, researchers have developed a new method 
for the instinctive analysis of AD based on machine learning and its subfield, 
deep learning. Recent state-of-the-art techniques consider multimodal diagnosis, 
which has been shown to achieve high accuracy compared to a unimodal prognosis. 
Furthermore, many studies have used structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
to measure brain volumes and the volume of subregions, as well as to search for 
diffuse changes in white/gray matter in the brain. In this study, T1-weighted 
structural MRI was used for the early classification of AD. MRI results in 
high-intensity visible features, making preprocessing and segmentation easy. To 
use this image modality, we acquired four types of datasets from each dataset's 
server. In this work, we downloaded 326 subjects from the National Research 
Center for Dementia homepage, 123 subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) homepage, 121 subjects from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Repository Without Borders homepage, and 131 subjects from the National 
Alzheimer's Coordinating Center homepage. In our experiment, we used the 
multiatlas label propagation with expectation-maximization-based refinement 
segmentation method. We segmented the images into 138 anatomical morphometry 
images (in which 40 features belonged to subcortical volumes and the remaining 
98 features belonged to cortical thickness). The entire dataset was split into a 
70 : 30 (training and testing) ratio before classifying the data. A principal 
component analysis was used for dimensionality reduction. Then, the support 
vector machine radial basis function classifier was used for classification 
between two groups-AD versus health control (HC) and early mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) (EMCI) versus late MCI (LMCI). The proposed method performed 
very well for all four types of dataset. For instance, for the AD versus HC 
group, the classifier achieved an area under curve (AUC) of more than 89% for 
each dataset. For the EMCI versus LMCI group, the classifier achieved an AUC of 
more than 80% for every dataset. Moreover, we also calculated Cohen kappa and 
Jaccard index statistical values for all datasets to evaluate the classification 
reliability. Finally, we compared our results with those of recently published 
state-of-the-art methods.
196
Caring for individuals with dementia is frequently associated with extreme 
physical and emotional stress, which often leads to depression. Smart home 
technology and advances in machine learning techniques can provide innovative 
solutions to reduce caregiver burden. One key service that caregivers provide is 
prompting individuals with memory limitations to initiate and complete daily 
activities. We hypothesize that sensor technologies combined with machine 
learning techniques can automate the process of providing reminder-based 
interventions. The first step towards automated interventions is to detect when 
an individual faces difficulty with activities. We propose machine learning 
approaches based on one-class classification that learn normal activity 
patterns. When we apply these classifiers to activity patterns that were not 
seen before, the classifiers are able to detect activity errors, which represent 
potential prompt situations. We validate our approaches on smart home sensor 
data obtained from older adult participants, some of whom faced difficulties 
performing routine activities and thus committed errors.
197
BACKGROUNDS: Falls are currently one of the important safety issues of elderly 
inpatients. Falls can lead to their injury, reduced mobility and comorbidity. In 
hospitals, it may cause medical disputes and staff guilty feelings and anxiety. 
We aimed to predict fall risks among hospitalized elderly patients using an 
approach of artificial intelligence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our working hypothesis was that if hospitalized elderly 
patients have multiple risk factors, their incidence of falls is higher. 
Artificial intelligence was then used to predict the incidence of falls of these 
patients. We enrolled those elderly patients aged >65 years old and were 
admitted to the geriatric ward during 2018 and 2019, at a single medical center 
in central Taiwan. We collected 21 physiological and clinical data of these 
patients from their electronic health records (EHR) with their comprehensive 
geriatric assessment (CGA). Data included demographic information, vital signs, 
visual ability, hearing ability, previous medication, and activity of daily 
living. We separated data from a total of 1,101 patients into 3 datasets: (a) 
training dataset, (b) testing dataset and (c) validation dataset. To predict 
incidence of falls, we applied 6 models: (a) Deep neural network (DNN), (b) 
machine learning algorithm extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), (c) Light 
Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM), (d) Random Forest, (e) Stochastic Gradient 
Descent (SGD) and (f) logistic regression.
RESULTS: From modeling data of 1,101 elderly patients, we found that machine 
learning algorithm XGBoost, LightGBM, Random forest, SGD and logistic regression 
were successfully trained. Finally, machine learning algorithm XGBoost achieved 
73.2% accuracy.
CONCLUSION: This is the first machine-learning based study using both EHR and 
CGA to predict fall risks of elderly. Multiple risk factors of falls in 
hospitalized elderly patients can be put into a machine learning model to 
predict future falls for early planned actions. Future studies should be focused 
on the model fitting and accuracy of data analysis.
198
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: A huge number of solutions based on computational 
systems have been recently developed for the classification of cognitive 
abnormalities in older people, so that individuals at high risk of developing 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer?s 
disease, can be identified before the manifestation of the diseases. Several 
factors are related to these pathologies, making the diagnostic process a hard 
problem to solve. This paper proposes a computational model based on the 
artificial neural network to classify data patterns of older adults.
METHODS: The proposal takes into account the several parameters as diagnostic 
factors as gender, age, the level of education, study time, and scores from 
cognitive tests (Mini-Mental State Examination, Semantic Verbal Fluency Test, 
Clinical Dementia Rating and Ascertaining Dementia). This non-linear regression 
model is designed to classify healthy and pathological aging with machine 
learning techniques such as neural networks, random forest, SVM, and stochastic 
gradient boosting. We deployed a simple linear regression model for the sake of 
comparison. The primary objective is to use a regression model to analyze the 
data set aiming to check which parameters are necessary to achieve high accuracy 
in the diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders.
RESULTS: The analysis demonstrated that the usage of cognitive tests produces 
median values for the accuracy greater than 90%. The ROC analysis shows that the 
best sensitivity performance is above 98% and specificity of 96% when the 
configurations have only cognitive tests.
CONCLUSIONS: The presented approach is a valuable tool for identifying patients 
with dementia or MCI and for supporting the clinician in the diagnostic process, 
by providing an outstanding support decision tool in the diagnostics of 
neurodegenerative diseases.
199
BACKGROUND: Identification of factors that may help to preserve cognitive 
function in late life could elucidate mechanisms and facilitate interventions to 
improve the lives of millions of people. However, the large number of potential 
factors associated with cognitive function poses an analytical challenge.
OBJECTIVE: We used data from the longitudinal Women's Health Initiative Memory 
Study (WHIMS) and machine learning to investigate 50 demographic, biomedical, 
behavioral, social, and psychological predictors of preserved cognitive function 
in later life.
METHODS: Participants in WHIMS and two consecutive follow up studies who were at 
least 80 years old and had at least one cognitive assessment following their 
80th birthday were classified as cognitively preserved. Preserved cognitive 
function was defined as having a score ≥39 on the most recent administration of 
the modified Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status (TICSm) and a mean score 
across all assessments ≥39. Cognitively impaired participants were those 
adjudicated by experts to have probable dementia or at least two adjudications 
of mild cognitive impairment within the 14 years of follow-up and a last TICSm 
score < 31. Random Forests was used to rank the predictors of preserved 
cognitive function.
RESULTS: Discrimination between groups based on area under the curve was 0.80 
(95%-CI-0.76-0.85). Women with preserved cognitive function were younger, better 
educated, and less forgetful, less depressed, and more optimistic at study 
enrollment. They also reported better physical function and less sleep 
disturbance, and had lower systolic blood pressure, hemoglobin, and blood 
glucose levels.
CONCLUSION: The predictors of preserved cognitive function include demographic, 
psychological, physical, metabolic, and vascular factors suggesting a complex 
mix of potential contributors.
200
BACKGROUND: In assessing the levels of clinical impairment in dementia, a 
summary index of neuropsychological batteries has been widely used in describing 
the overall functional status.
OBJECTIVE: It remains unexamined how complex patterns of the test performances 
can be utilized to have specific predictive meaning when the machine learning 
approach is applied.
METHODS: In this study, the neuropsychological battery (CERAD-K) and assessment 
of functioning level (Clinical Dementia Rating scale and Instrumental Activities 
of Daily Living) were administered to 2,642 older adults with no impairment 
(n = 285), mild cognitive impairment (n = 1,057), and Alzheimer's disease 
(n = 1,300). Predictive accuracy on functional impairment level with the linear 
models of the single total score or multiple subtest scores (Model 1, 2) and 
support vector regression with low or high complexity (Model 3, 4) were compared 
across different sample sizes.
RESULTS: The linear models (Model 1, 2) showed superior performance with 
relatively smaller sample size, while nonlinear models with low and high 
complexity (Model 3, 4) showed an improved accuracy with a larger dataset. 
Unlike linear models, the nonlinear models showed a gradual increase in the 
predictive accuracy with a larger sample size (n > 500), especially when the 
model training is allowed to exploit complex patterns of the dataset.
CONCLUSION: Our finding suggests that nonlinear models can predict levels of 
functional impairment with a sufficient dataset. The summary index of the 
neuropsychological battery can be augmented for specific purposes, especially in 
estimating the functional status of dementia.
201
PURPOSE: Previous studies showed voxel-based volumetry as a helpful tool in 
detecting pathologic brain atrophy. Aim of this study was to investigate whether 
the inclusion of CSF volume improves the imaging based diagnostic accuracy using 
combined automated voxel- and region-based volumetry.
METHODS: In total, 120 individuals (30 healthy elderly, 30 frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD), 30 Alzheimer's dementia (AD) and 30 Lewy body dementia (LBD) 
patients) were analyzed with voxel-based morphometry and compared to a reference 
group of 360 healthy elderly controls. Abnormal GM and CSF volumes were 
visualized via z-scores. Volumetric results were finally evaluated by ROC 
analyses.
RESULTS: Based on the volume of abnormal GM and CSF voxels high accuracy was 
shown in separating dementia from normal ageing (AUC 0.93 and 0.91, 
respectively) within 5 different brain regions per hemisphere (frontal, medial 
temporal, temporal, parietal, occipital). Accuracy for separating FTD and AD was 
higher based on CSF volume (FTD: AUC 0.80 vs. 0.75 in frontal regions; AD: AUC 
0.78 vs. 0.68 in parietal regions based on CSF and GM respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Differentiation of dementia patients from normal ageing persons 
shows high accuracy when based on automatic volumetry alone. Evaluating volumes 
of abnormal CSF performed better than volumes of abnormal GM, especially in AD 
and FTD patients.
202
OBJECTIVE: Digital mental health interventions (DMHIs) are an effective 
treatment modality for common mental disorders like depression and anxiety; 
however, the role of intervention engagement as a longitudinal "dosing" factor 
is poorly understood in relation to clinical outcomes.
METHODS: We studied 4978 participants in a 12-week therapist-supported DMHI 
(June 2020-December 2021), applying a longitudinal agglomerative hierarchical 
cluster analysis to the number of days per week of intervention engagement. The 
proportion of people demonstrating remission in depression and anxiety symptoms 
during the intervention was calculated for each cluster. Multivariable logistic 
regression models were fit to examine associations between the engagement 
clusters and symptom remission, adjusting for demographic and clinical 
characteristics.
RESULTS: Based on clinical interpretability and stopping rules, four clusters 
were derived from the hierarchical cluster analysis (in descending order): a) 
sustained high engagers (45.0%), b) late disengagers (24.1%), c) early 
disengagers (22.5%), and d) immediate disengagers (8.4%). Bivariate and 
multivariate analyses supported a dose-response relationship between engagement 
and depression symptom remission, whereas the pattern was partially evident for 
anxiety symptom remission. In multivariable logistic regression models, older 
age groups, male participants, and Asians had increased odds of achieving 
depression and anxiety symptom remission, whereas higher odds of anxiety symptom 
remission were observed among gender-expansive individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Segmentation based on the frequency of engagement performs well in 
discerning timing of intervention disengagement and a dose-response relationship 
with clinical outcomes. The findings among the demographic subpopulations 
indicate that therapist-supported DMHIs may be effective in addressing mental 
health problems among patients who disproportionately experience stigma and 
structural barriers to care. Machine learning models can enable precision care 
by delineating how heterogeneous patterns of engagement over time relate to 
clinical outcomes. This empirical identification may help clinicians personalize 
and optimize interventions to prevent premature disengagement.
203
Emerging evidence suggests that atypical changes in driving behaviors may be 
early signals of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia. This study aims 
to assess the utility of naturalistic driving data and machine learning 
techniques in predicting incident MCI and dementia in older adults. Monthly 
driving data captured by in-vehicle recording devices for up to 45 months from 
2977 participants of the Longitudinal Research on Aging Drivers study were 
processed to generate 29 variables measuring driving behaviors, space and 
performance. Incident MCI and dementia cases (n = 64) were ascertained from 
medical record reviews and annual interviews. Random forests were used to 
classify the participant MCI/dementia status during the follow-up. The F1 score 
of random forests in discriminating MCI/dementia status was 29% based on 
demographic characteristics (age, sex, race/ethnicity and education) only, 66% 
based on driving variables only, and 88% based on demographic characteristics 
and driving variables. Feature importance analysis revealed that age was most 
predictive of MCI and dementia, followed by the percentage of trips traveled 
within 15 miles of home, race/ethnicity, minutes per trip chain (i.e., length of 
trips starting and ending at home), minutes per trip, and number of hard braking 
events with deceleration rates ≥ 0.35 g. If validated, the algorithms developed 
in this study could provide a novel tool for early detection and management of 
MCI and dementia in older drivers.
204
BACKGROUND: Apathy is present in several psychiatric and neurological conditions 
and has been found to have a severe negative effect on disease progression. In 
older people, it can be a predictor of increased dementia risk. Current 
assessment methods lack objectivity and sensitivity, thus new diagnostic tools 
and broad-scale screening technologies are needed.
OBJECTIVE: This study is the first of its kind aiming to investigate whether 
automatic speech analysis could be used for characterization and detection of 
apathy.
METHODS: A group of apathetic and non-apathetic patients (n = 60) with mild to 
moderate neurocognitive disorder were recorded while performing two short 
narrative speech tasks. Paralinguistic markers relating to prosodic, formant, 
source, and temporal qualities of speech were automatically extracted, examined 
between the groups and compared to baseline assessments. Machine learning 
experiments were carried out to validate the diagnostic power of extracted 
markers.
RESULTS: Correlations between apathy sub-scales and features revealed a relation 
between temporal aspects of speech and the subdomains of reduction in interest 
and initiative, as well as between prosody features and the affective domain. 
Group differences were found to vary for males and females, depending on the 
task. Differences in temporal aspects of speech were found to be the most 
consistent difference between apathetic and non-apathetic patients. Machine 
learning models trained on speech features achieved top performances of 
AUC = 0.88 for males and AUC = 0.77 for females.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reinforce the usability of speech as a reliable 
biomarker in the detection and assessment of apathy.
205
BACKGROUND: Online mental health information represents important resources for 
people living with mental health issues. Suitability of mental health 
information for effective self-care remains understudied, despite the increasing 
needs for more actionable mental health resources, especially among young 
people.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to develop Bayesian machine learning classifiers as 
data-based decision aids for the assessment of the actionability of credible 
mental health information for people with mental health issues and diseases.
METHODS: We collected and classified creditable online health information on 
mental health issues into generic mental health (GEN) information and 
patient-specific (PAS) mental health information. GEN and PAS were both 
patient-oriented health resources developed by health authorities of mental 
health and public health promotion. GENs were non-classified online health 
information without indication of targeted readerships; PASs were developed 
purposefully for specific populations (young, elderly people, pregnant women, 
and men) as indicated by their website labels. To ensure the generalisability of 
our model, we chose to develop a sparse Bayesian machine learning classifier 
using Relevance Vector Machine (RVM).
RESULTS: Using optimisation and normalisation techniques, we developed a 
best-performing classifier through joint optimisation of natural language 
features and min-max normalisation of feature frequencies. The AUC (0.957), 
sensitivity (0.900), and specificity (0.953) of the best model were 
statistically higher (p < 0.05) than other models using parallel optimisation of 
structural and semantic features with or without feature normalisation. We 
subsequently evaluated the diagnostic utility of our model in the clinic by 
comparing its positive (LR+) and negative likelihood ratios (LR-) and 95% 
confidence intervals (95% C.I.) as we adjusted the probability thresholds with 
the range of 0.1 and 0.9. We found that the best pair of LR+ (18.031, 95% C.I.: 
10.992, 29.577) and LR- (0.100, 95% C.I.: 0.068, 0.148) was found when the 
probability threshold was set to 0.45 associated with a sensitivity of 0.905 
(95%: 0.867, 0.942) and specificity of 0.950 (95% C.I.: 0.925, 0.975). These 
statistical properties of our model suggested its applicability in the clinic.
CONCLUSION: Our study found that PAS had significant advantage over GEN mental 
health information regarding information actionability, engagement, and 
suitability for specific populations with distinct mental health issues. GEN is 
more suitable for general mental health information acquisition, whereas PAS can 
effectively engage patients and provide more effective and needed self-care 
support. The Bayesian machine learning classifier developed provided automatic 
tools to support decision making in the clinic to identify more actionable 
resources, effective to support self-care among different populations.
206
OBJECTIVE: Currently, depression diagnosis relies primarily on behavioral 
symptoms and signs, and treatment is guided by trial and error instead of 
evaluating associated underlying brain characteristics. Unlike past studies, we 
attempted to estimate accurate prediction models for late-life depression 
diagnosis and treatment response using multiple machine learning methods with 
inputs of multi-modal imaging and non-imaging whole brain and network-based 
features.
METHODS: Late-life depression patients (medicated post-recruitment) (n = 33) and 
older non-depressed individuals (n = 35) were recruited. Their demographics and 
cognitive ability scores were recorded, and brain characteristics were acquired 
using multi-modal magnetic resonance imaging pretreatment. Linear and nonlinear 
learning methods were tested for estimating accurate prediction models.
RESULTS: A learning method called alternating decision trees estimated the most 
accurate prediction models for late-life depression diagnosis (87.27% accuracy) 
and treatment response (89.47% accuracy). The diagnosis model included measures 
of age, Mini-mental state examination score, and structural imaging (e.g. whole 
brain atrophy and global white mater hyperintensity burden). The treatment 
response model included measures of structural and functional connectivity.
CONCLUSIONS: Combinations of multi-modal imaging and/or non-imaging measures may 
help better predict late-life depression diagnosis and treatment response. As a 
preliminary observation, we speculate that the results may also suggest that 
different underlying brain characteristics defined by multi-modal imaging 
measures-rather than region-based differences-are associated with depression 
versus depression recovery because to our knowledge this is the first depression 
study to accurately predict both using the same approach. These findings may 
help better understand late-life depression and identify preliminary steps 
toward personalized late-life depression treatment.
207
Older patients with depression or Alzheimer's disease (AD) at the stage of early 
dementia or mild cognitive impairment may present with objective cognitive 
impairment, although the pathology and thus therapy and prognosis differ 
substantially. In this study, we assessed the potential of an automated 
algorithm to categorize a test set of 65 T1-weighted structural magnetic 
resonance images (MRI). A convenience sample of elderly individuals fulfilling 
clinical criteria of either AD (n = 28) or moderate and severe depression 
(n = 37) was recruited from different settings to assess the potential of the 
pattern recognition method to assist in the differential diagnosis of AD versus 
depression. We found that our algorithm learned discriminative patterns in the 
subject's grey matter distribution reflected by an area under the receiver 
operator characteristics curve of up to 0.83 (confidence interval ranged from 
0.67 to 0.92) and a balanced accuracy of 0.79 for the separation of depression 
from AD, evaluated by leave-one-out cross validation. The algorithm also 
identified consistent structural differences in a clinically more relevant 
scenario where the data used during training were independent from the data used 
for evaluation and, critically, which included five possible diagnoses 
(specifically AD, frontotemporal dementia, Lewy body dementia, depression, and 
healthy aging). While the output was insufficiently accurate to use it directly 
as a means for classification when multiple classes are possible, the continuous 
output computed by the machine learning algorithm differed between the two 
groups that were investigated. The automated analysis thus could complement, but 
not replace clinical assessments.
208
BACKGROUND: Early identification of different stages of cognitive impairment is 
important to provide available intervention and timely care for the elderly.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine the ability of the artificial 
intelligence (AI) technology to distinguish participants with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) from those with mild to moderate dementia based on automated 
video analysis.
METHODS: A total of 95 participants were recruited (MCI, 41; mild to moderate 
dementia, 54). The videos were captured during the Short Portable Mental Status 
Questionnaire process; the visual and aural features were extracted using these 
videos. Deep learning models were subsequently constructed for the binary 
differentiation of MCI and mild to moderate dementia. Correlation analysis of 
the predicted Mini-Mental State Examination, Cognitive Abilities Screening 
Instrument scores, and ground truth was also performed.
RESULTS: Deep learning models combining both the visual and aural features 
discriminated MCI from mild to moderate dementia with an area under the curve 
(AUC) of 77.0% and accuracy of 76.0%. The AUC and accuracy increased to 93.0% 
and 88.0%, respectively, when depression and anxiety were excluded. Significant 
moderate correlations were observed between the predicted cognitive function and 
ground truth, and the correlation was strong excluding depression and anxiety. 
Interestingly, female, but not male, exhibited a correlation.
CONCLUSION: The study showed that video-based deep learning models can 
differentiate participants with MCI from those with mild to moderate dementia 
and can predict cognitive function. This approach may offer a cost-effective and 
easily applicable method for early detection of cognitive impairment.
209
BACKGROUND: Early detection of Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) 
in a primary care setting is challenging due to time constraints and stigma. The 
implementation of scalable, sustainable, and patient-driven processes may 
improve early detection of ADRD; however, there are competing approaches; 
information may be obtained either directly from a patient (e.g., through a 
questionnaire) or passively using electronic health record (EHR) data. In this 
study, we aim to identify the benefit of a combined approach using a pragmatic 
cluster-randomized clinical trial.
METHODS: We have developed a Passive Digital Marker (PDM), based on machine 
learning algorithms applied to EHR data, and paired it with a patient-reported 
outcome (the Quick Dementia Rating Scale or QDRS) to rapidly share an identified 
risk of impairment to a patient's physician. Clinics in both south Florida and 
Indiana will be randomly assigned to one of three study arms: 1200 patients in 
each of the two populations will be administered either the PDM, the PDM with 
the QDRS, or neither, for a total of 7200 patients across all clinics and 
populations. Both incidence of ADRD diagnosis and acceptance into ADRD 
diagnostic work-up regimens is hypothesized to increase when patients are 
administered both the PDM and QDRS. Physicians performing the work-up regimens 
will be blind to the study arm of the patient.
DISCUSSION: This study aims to test the accuracy and effectiveness of the two 
scalable approaches (PDM and QDRS) for the early detection of ADRD among older 
adults attending primary care practices. The data obtained in this study may 
lead to national early detection and management program for ADRD as an efficient 
and beneficial method of reducing the current and future burden of ADRD, as well 
as improving the annual rate of newly documented ADRD in primary care practices.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT05231954 . Registered 
February 9, 2022.
210
BACKGROUND: Depression, anxiety, and apathy are highly prevalent in older people 
with preclinical dementia and mild cognitive impairment. These symptoms have 
also proven valuable in predicting the progression from mild cognitive 
impairment to dementia, enabling a timely diagnosis and treatment. However, 
objective and reliable indicators to detect and distinguish depression, anxiety, 
and apathy are relatively scarce.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to develop a machine learning model to detect and 
distinguish depression, anxiety, and apathy based on speech and facial 
expressions.
DESIGN: An observational, cross-sectional study design.
SETTING(S): The memory outpatient department of a tertiary hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: 319 older adults diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment.
METHODS: Depression, anxiety, and apathy were evaluated by the Public Health 
Questionnaire, General Anxiety Disorder, and Apathy Evaluation Scale, 
respectively. Speech and facial expressions of older adults with mild cognitive 
impairment were digitally captured using audio and video recording software. 
Open-source data analysis toolkits were utilized to extract speech, facial, and 
text features. The multiclass classification was used to develop classification 
models, and shapely additive explanations were used to explain the contribution 
of each feature within the model.
RESULTS: The random forest method was used to develop a multiclass emotion 
classification model, which performed well in classifying emotions with a 
weighted-average F1 score of 96.6 %. The model also demonstrated high accuracy, 
precision, and recall, with 87.4 %, 86.6 %, and 87.6 %, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The machine learning model developed in this study demonstrated 
strong classification performance in detecting and differentiating depression, 
anxiety, and apathy. This innovative approach combines text, audio, and video to 
provide objective methods for precise classification and remote monitoring of 
these symptoms in nursing practice.
REGISTRATION: This study was registered at the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry 
(registration number: ChiCTR1900023892; registration date: June 19th, 2019).
211
The steady degeneration of neurons is the hallmark of neurodegenerative 
illnesses, which are, by definition, incurable. Corticobasal Syndrome (CS), 
Huntington's Disease (HD), Dementia, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), 
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Parkinson's Disease (PD) are some of 
the common neurodegenerative diseases which has impacted millions of people, 
predominantly among the older population. Various computational techniques, 
including but not limited to machine learning, are emerging as discrimination 
and detection of neuro-related diseases. This research proposed a machine 
learning-based framework to correctly detect PD, HD, and ALS from the gait 
signals of subjects both in binary and multi-class detection environment. The 
detection approach proposed here combines the classification power of Naïve 
Bayes and Logistic Regression jointly in a modern UltraBoost ensemble framework. 
The proposed method is unique in its ability to detect neuro diseases with a 
small number of gait features. The proposed approach ascertains most essential 
gait features through three state-of-the-art feature selection schemes, infinite 
feature selection, infinite latent feature selection and Sigmis feature 
selection. It has been observed that the gait signal features of the subjects 
are identified through Infinite Feature Selection manifests better detection 
results than the features obtained through Infinite Latent Feature and Sigmis 
feature selection while detecting Parkinson's and Huntington's Disease in a 
multi-class environment. So far as the binary detection environment is concern, 
the Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is detected with 99.1% detection accuracy 
using 18 Sigmis gait features, with 99.1% sensitivity and 98.9% specificity, 
respectively. Similarly, Huntington's disease was detected with 94.2% detection 
accuracy, 94.2% sensitivity, and 94.5% specificity using 5 Sigmis gait features. 
Finally, Parkinson's disease was detected with 98.4% sensitivity, specificity, 
and detection accuracy.
212
OBJECTIVES: This paper uses deep (machine) learning techniques to develop and 
test how motor behaviors, derived from location and movement sensor tracking 
data, may be associated with falls, delirium, and urinary tract infections 
(UTIs) in long-term care (LTC) residents.
DESIGN: Longitudinal observational study.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: A total of 23 LTC residents (81,323 observations) with 
cognitive impairment or dementia in 2 northeast Department of Veterans Affairs 
LTC facilities.
METHODS: More than 18 months of continuous (24/7) monitoring of motor behavior 
and activity levels used objective radiofrequency identification sensor data to 
track and record movement data. Occurrence of acute events was recorded each 
week. Unsupervised deep learning models were used to classify motor behaviors 
into 5 clusters; supervised decision tree algorithms used these clusters to 
predict acute health events (falls, delirium, and UTIs) the week before the week 
of the event.
RESULTS: Motor behaviors were classified into 5 categories (Silhouette score = 
0.67), and these were significantly different from each other. Motor behavior 
classifications were sensitive and specific to falls, delirium, and UTI 
predictions 1 week before the week of the event (sensitivity range = 0.88-0.91; 
specificity range = 0.71-0.88).
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: Intraindividual changes in motor behaviors predict 
some of the most common and detrimental acute events in LTC populations. Study 
findings suggest real-time locating system sensor data and machine learning 
techniques may be used in clinical applications to effectively prevent falls and 
lead to the earlier recognition of risk for delirium and UTIs in this vulnerable 
population.
213
Around one-third of epilepsy patients develop drug-resistant seizures; early 
detection of seizures could help improve safety, reduce patient anxiety, 
increase independence, and enable acute treatment. In recent years, the use of 
artificial intelligence techniques and machine learning algorithms in different 
diseases, including epilepsy, has increased significantly. The main objective of 
this study is to determine whether the mjn-SERAS artificial intelligence 
algorithm developed by MJN Neuroserveis, can detect seizures early using 
patient-specific data to create a personalized mathematical model based on EEG 
training, defined as the programmed recognition of oncoming seizures before they 
are primarily initiated, usually within a period of a few minutes, in patients 
diagnosed of epilepsy. Retrospective, cross-sectional, observational, 
multicenter study to determine the sensitivity and specificity of the artificial 
intelligence algorithm. We searched the database of the Epilepsy Units of three 
Spanish medical centers and selected 50 patients evaluated between January 2017 
and February 2021, diagnosed with refractory focal epilepsy who underwent 
video-EEG monitoring recordings between 3 and 5 days, a minimum of 3 seizures 
per patient, lasting more than 5 s and the interval between each seizure was 
greater than 1 h. Exclusion criteria included age <18 years, intracranial EEG 
monitoring, and severe psychiatric, neurological, or systemic disorders. The 
algorithm identified pre-ictal and interictal patterns from EEG data using our 
learning algorithm and was compared to a senior epileptologist's evaluation as a 
gold standard. Individual mathematical models of each patient were trained using 
this feature dataset. A total of 1963 h of 49 video-EEG recordings were 
reviewed, with an average of 39.26 h per patient. The video-EEG monitoring 
recorded 309 seizures as subsequently analyzed by the epileptologists. The 
mjn-SERAS algorithm was trained on 119 seizures and split testing was performed 
on 188 seizures. The statistical analysis includes the data from each model and 
reports 10 false negatives (no detection of episodes recorded by video-EEG) and 
22 false positives (alert detected without clinical correlation or abnormal EEG 
signal within 30 min). Specifically, the automated mjn-SERAS AI algorithm 
achieved a sensitivity of 94.7% (95 %; CI 94.67-94.73), and an F-Score 
representing specificity of 92.2% (95 %; CI 92.17-92.23) compared to the 
reference performance represented by a mean (harmonic mean or average) and a 
positive predictive value of 91%, with a false positive rate of 0.55 per 24 h in 
the patient-independent model. This patient-specific AI algorithm for early 
seizure detection shows promising results in terms of sensitivity and false 
positive rate. Although the algorithm requires high computational requirements 
on specialized servers cloud for training and computing, its computational load 
in real-time is low, allowing its implementation on embedded devices for online 
seizure detection.
214
Research has failed to resolve the dilemma experienced by localized prostate 
cancer patients who must choose between radical prostatectomy (RP) and external 
beam radiotherapy (RT). Because the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) is a 
measurable factor that affects survival events, this research seeks to validate 
the potential of the CCI to improve the accuracy of various prediction models. 
Thus, we employed the Cox proportional hazard model and machine learning 
methods, including random forest (RF) and support vector machine (SVM), to model 
the data of medical records in the National Health Insurance Research Database 
(NHIRD). In total, 8581 individuals were enrolled, of whom 4879 had received RP 
and 3702 had received RT. Patients in the RT group were older and exhibited 
higher CCI scores and higher incidences of some CCI items. Moderate-to-severe 
liver disease, dementia, congestive heart failure, chronic pulmonary disease, 
and cerebrovascular disease all increase the risk of overall death in the Cox 
hazard model. The CCI-reinforced SVM and RF models are 85.18% and 81.76% 
accurate, respectively, whereas the SVM and RF models without the use of the CCI 
are relatively less accurate, at 75.81% and 74.83%, respectively. Therefore, CCI 
and some of its items are useful predictors of overall and 
prostate-cancer-specific survival and could constitute valuable features for 
machine-learning modeling.
215
BACKGROUND: The worldwide prevalence of dementia is rapidly rising. Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), accounts for 70% of cases and has a 10-20-year preclinical period, 
when brain pathology covertly progresses before cognitive symptoms appear. The 
2020 Lancet Commission estimates that 40% of dementia cases could be prevented 
by modifying lifestyle/medical risk factors. To optimise dementia prevention 
effectiveness, there is urgent need to identify individuals with preclinical AD 
for targeted risk reduction. Current preclinical AD tests are too invasive, 
specialist or costly for population-level assessments. We have developed a new 
online test, TAS Test, that assesses a range of motor-cognitive functions and 
has capacity to be delivered at significant scale. TAS Test combines two 
innovations: using hand movement analysis to detect preclinical AD, and 
computer-human interface technologies to enable robust 'self-testing' data 
collection. The aims are to validate TAS Test to [1] identify preclinical AD, 
and [2] predict risk of cognitive decline and AD dementia.
METHODS: Aim 1 will be addressed through a cross-sectional study of 500 
cognitively healthy older adults, who will complete TAS Test items comprising 
measures of motor control, processing speed, attention, visuospatial ability, 
memory and language. TAS Test measures will be compared to a blood-based AD 
biomarker, phosphorylated tau 181 (p-tau181). Aim 2 will be addressed through a 
5-year prospective cohort study of 10,000 older adults. Participants will 
complete TAS Test annually and subtests of the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test 
Battery (CANTAB) biennially. 300 participants will undergo in-person clinical 
assessments. We will use machine learning of motor-cognitive performance on TAS 
Test to develop an algorithm that classifies preclinical AD risk 
(p-tau181-defined) and determine the precision to prospectively estimate 5-year 
risks of cognitive decline and AD.
DISCUSSION: This study will establish the precision of TAS Test to identify 
preclinical AD and estimate risk of cognitive decline and AD. If accurate, TAS 
Test will provide a low-cost, accessible enrichment strategy to pre-screen 
individuals for their likelihood of AD pathology prior to more expensive tests 
such as blood or imaging biomarkers. This would have wide applications in public 
health initiatives and clinical trials.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT05194787 , 18 January 
216
BACKGROUND: Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Training (DBT-ST) as stand-alone 
treatment has demonstrated promising outcomes for the treatment of alcohol use 
disorder (AUD) and concurrent substance use disorders (SUDs). However, no 
studies have so far empirically investigated factors that might predict efficacy 
of this therapeutic model.
METHODS: 275 treatment-seeking individuals with AUD and other SUDs were 
consecutively admitted to a 3-month DBT-ST program (in- + outpatient; outpatient 
settings). The machine learning routine applied (i.e. penalized regression 
combined with a nested cross-validation procedure) was conducted in order to 
estimate predictive values of a wide panel of clinical variables in a single 
statistical framework on drop-out and substance-use behaviors, dealing with 
related multicollinearity, and eliminating redundant variables.
RESULTS: The cross-validated elastic net model significantly predicted the 
drop-out. The bootstrap analysis revealed that subjects who showed substance-use 
behaviors during the intervention and who were treated with the mixed setting 
(i.e., in- and outpatient) program, together with higher ASI alcohol scores were 
associated with an higher probability of drop-out. On the contrary, older 
subjects, higher levels of education, together with higher scores of DERS 
awareness subscale were negatively associated to drop-out. Similarly, lifetime 
co-diagnoses of anxiety, bipolar, and gambling disorders, together with bulimia 
nervosa negatively predicted the drop-out. The machine learning model did not 
identify predictive variables of substance-use behaviors during the treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The DBT-ST program could be considered a valid therapeutic approach 
especially when AUD and other SUDs co-occur with other psychiatric conditions 
and, it is carried out as a full outpatient intervention.
217
Erratum in
218
BACKGROUND: Early identification of the middle-aged and elderly people with high 
219
BACKGROUND: Poorly managed pain can lead to substance use disorders, depression, 
suicide, worsening health, and increased use of health services. Most pain 
assessments occur in clinical settings away from patients' natural environments. 
Advances in smart home technology may allow observation of pain in the home 
setting. Smart homes recognizing human behaviors may be useful for quantifying 
functional pain interference, thereby creating new ways of assessing pain and 
supporting people living with pain.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to determine if a smart home can detect pain-related 
behaviors to perform automated assessment and support intervention for persons 
with chronic pain.
METHODS: A multiple methods, secondary data analysis was conducted using 
historic ambient sensor data and weekly nursing assessment data from 11 
independent older adults reporting pain across 1-2 years of smart home 
monitoring. A qualitative approach was used to interpret sensor-based data of 27 
unique pain events to support clinician-guided training of a machine learning 
model. A periodogram was used to calculate circadian rhythm strength, and a 
random forest containing 100 trees was employed to train a machine learning 
model to recognize pain-related behaviors. The model extracted 550 behavioral 
markers for each sensor-based data segment. These were treated as both a binary 
classification problem (event, control) and a regression problem.
RESULTS: We found 13 clinically relevant behaviors, revealing 6 pain-related 
behavioral qualitative themes. Quantitative results were classified using a 
clinician-guided random forest technique that yielded a classification accuracy 
of 0.70, sensitivity of 0.72, specificity of 0.69, area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve of 0.756, and area under the precision-recall 
curve of 0.777 in comparison to using standard anomaly detection techniques 
without clinician guidance (0.16 accuracy achieved; P<.001). The regression 
formulation achieved moderate correlation, with r=0.42.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings of this secondary data analysis reveal that a 
pain-assessing smart home may recognize pain-related behaviors. Utilizing 
clinicians' real-world knowledge when developing pain-assessing machine learning 
models improves the model's performance. A larger study focusing on pain-related 
behaviors is warranted to improve and test model performance.
220
BACKGROUND: Machine learning techniques, specifically classification algorithms, 
may be effective to help understand key health, nutritional, and environmental 
factors associated with cognitive function in aging populations.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to use classification techniques to identify the key 
patient predictors that are considered most important in the classification of 
poorer cognitive performance, which is an early risk factor for dementia.
METHODS: Data were used from the Trinity-Ulster and Department of Agriculture 
study, which included detailed information on sociodemographic, clinical, 
biochemical, nutritional, and lifestyle factors in 5186 older adults recruited 
from the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, a proportion of whom 
(987/5186, 19.03%) were followed up 5-7 years later for reassessment. Cognitive 
function at both time points was assessed using a battery of tests, including 
the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS), 
with a score <70 classed as poorer cognitive performance. This study trained 3 
classifiers-decision trees, Naïve Bayes, and random forests-to classify the 
RBANS score and to identify key health, nutritional, and environmental 
predictors of cognitive performance and cognitive decline over the follow-up 
period. It assessed their performance, taking note of the variables that were 
deemed important for the optimized classifiers for their computational 
diagnostics.
RESULTS: In the classification of a low RBANS score (<70), our models performed 
well (F1 score range 0.73-0.93), all highlighting the individual's score from 
the Timed Up and Go (TUG) test, the age at which the participant stopped 
education, and whether or not the participant's family reported memory concerns 
to be of key importance. The classification models performed well in classifying 
a greater rate of decline in the RBANS score (F1 score range 0.66-0.85), also 
indicating the TUG score to be of key importance, followed by blood indicators: 
plasma homocysteine, vitamin B6 biomarker (plasma pyridoxal-5-phosphate), and 
glycated hemoglobin.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that it may be possible for a health care 
professional to make an initial evaluation, with a high level of confidence, of 
the potential for cognitive dysfunction using only a few short, noninvasive 
questions, thus providing a quick, efficient, and noninvasive way to help them 
decide whether or not a patient requires a full cognitive evaluation. This 
approach has the potential benefits of making time and cost savings for health 
service providers and avoiding stress created through unnecessary cognitive 
assessments in low-risk patients.
Moore, Leane Hoey, Jonathan Wallace, Chris Gill, Paul Carlin, Anne M Molloy, 
221
During the COVID-19 pandemic, an increase in poor mental health among Asian 
Indians was observed in the United States. However, the leading predictors of 
poor mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic in Asian Indians remained 
unknown. A cross-sectional online survey was administered to self-identified 
Asian Indians aged 18 and older (N = 289). Survey collected information on 
demographic and socio-economic characteristics and the COVID-19 burden. Two 
novel machine learning techniques-eXtreme Gradient Boosting and Shapley Additive 
exPlanations (SHAP) were used to identify the leading predictors and explain 
their associations with poor mental health. A majority of the study participants 
were female (65.1%), below 50 years of age (73.3%), and had income ≥ $75,000 
(81.0%). The six leading predictors of poor mental health among Asian Indians 
were sleep disturbance, age, general health, income, wearing a mask, and 
self-reported discrimination. SHAP plots indicated that higher age, wearing a 
mask, and maintaining social distancing all the time were negatively associated 
with poor mental health while having sleep disturbance and imputed income levels 
were positively associated with poor mental health. The model performance 
metrics indicated high accuracy (0.77), precision (0.78), F1 score (0.77), 
recall (0.77), and AUROC (0.87). Nearly one in two adults reported poor mental 
health, and one in five reported sleep disturbance. Findings from our study 
suggest a paradoxical relationship between income and poor mental health; 
further studies are needed to confirm our study findings. Sleep disturbance and 
perceived discrimination can be targeted through tailored intervention to reduce 
the risk of poor mental health in Asian Indians.
222
IMPORTANCE: Sedentary behavior is associated with cardiometabolic disease and 
mortality, but its association with dementia is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether accelerometer-assessed sedentary behavior is 
associated with incident dementia.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A retrospective study of prospectively 
collected data from the UK Biobank including 49 841 adults aged 60 years or 
older without a diagnosis of dementia at the time of wearing the wrist 
accelerometer and living in England, Scotland, or Wales. Follow-up began at the 
time of wearing the accelerometer (February 2013 to December 2015) and continued 
until September 2021 in England, July 2021 in Scotland, and February 2018 in 
Wales.
EXPOSURES: Mean daily sedentary behavior time (included in the primary analysis) 
and mean daily sedentary bout length, maximum daily sedentary bout length, and 
mean number of daily sedentary bouts (included in the secondary analyses) were 
derived from a machine learning-based analysis of 1 week of wrist-worn 
accelerometer data.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: Incident all-cause dementia diagnosis from inpatient 
hospital records and death registry data. Cox proportional hazard models with 
linear and cubic spline terms were used to assess associations.
RESULTS: A total of 49 841 older adults (mean age, 67.19 [SD, 4.29] years; 54.7% 
were female) were followed up for a mean of 6.72 years (SD, 0.95 years). During 
this time, 414 individuals were diagnosed with incident all-cause dementia. In 
the fully adjusted models, there was a significant nonlinear association between 
time spent in sedentary behavior and incident dementia. Relative to a median of 
9.27 hours/d for sedentary behavior, the hazard ratios (HRs) for dementia were 
1.08 (95% CI, 1.04-1.12, P < .001) for 10 hours/d, 1.63 (95% CI, 1.35-1.97, 
P < .001) for 12 hours/d, and 3.21 (95% CI, 2.05-5.04, P < .001) for 15 hours/d. 
The adjusted incidence rate of dementia per 1000 person-years was 7.49 (95% CI, 
7.48-7.49) for 9.27 hours/d of sedentary behavior, 8.06 (95% CI, 7.76-8.36) for 
10 hours/d, 12.00 (95% CI, 10.00-14.36) for 12 hours/d, and 22.74 (95% CI, 
14.92-34.11) for 15 hours/d. Mean daily sedentary bout length (HR, 1.53 [95% CI, 
1.03-2.27], P = .04 and 0.65 [95% CI, 0.04-1.57] more dementia cases per 1000 
person-years for a 1-hour increase from the mean of 0.48 hours) and maximum 
daily sedentary bout length (HR, 1.15 [95% CI, 1.02-1.31], P = .02 and 0.19 [95% 
CI, 0.02-0.38] more dementia cases per 1000 person-years for a 1-hour increase 
from the mean of 1.95 hours) were significantly associated with higher risk of 
incident dementia. The number of sedentary bouts per day was not associated with 
higher risk of incident dementia (HR, 1.00 [95% CI, 0.99-1.01], P = .89). In the 
sensitivity analyses, after adjustment for time spent in sedentary behavior, the 
mean daily sedentary bout length and the maximum daily sedentary bout length 
were no longer significantly associated with incident dementia.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among older adults, more time spent in sedentary 
behaviors was significantly associated with higher incidence of all-cause 
dementia. Future research is needed to determine whether the association between 
sedentary behavior and risk of dementia is causal.
223
Introduction: Research related to the automatic detection of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) is important, given the high prevalence of AD and the high cost of 
traditional diagnostic methods. Since AD significantly affects the content and 
acoustics of spontaneous speech, natural language processing, and machine 
learning provide promising techniques for reliably detecting AD. There has been 
a recent proliferation of classification models for AD, but these vary in the 
datasets used, model types and training and testing paradigms. In this study, we 
compare and contrast the performance of two common approaches for automatic AD 
detection from speech on the same, well-matched dataset, to determine the 
advantages of using domain knowledge vs. pre-trained transfer models. Methods: 
Audio recordings and corresponding manually-transcribed speech transcripts of a 
picture description task administered to 156 demographically matched older 
adults, 78 with Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and 78 cognitively intact (healthy) 
were classified using machine learning and natural language processing as "AD" 
or "non-AD." The audio was acoustically-enhanced, and post-processed to improve 
quality of the speech recording as well control for variation caused by 
recording conditions. Two approaches were used for classification of these 
speech samples: (1) using domain knowledge: extracting an extensive set of 
clinically relevant linguistic and acoustic features derived from speech and 
transcripts based on prior literature, and (2) using transfer-learning and 
leveraging large pre-trained machine learning models: using 
transcript-representations that are automatically derived from state-of-the-art 
pre-trained language models, by fine-tuning Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformer (BERT)-based sequence classification models. 
Results: We compared the utility of speech transcript representations obtained 
from recent natural language processing models (i.e., BERT) to more 
clinically-interpretable language feature-based methods. Both the feature-based 
approaches and fine-tuned BERT models significantly outperformed the baseline 
linguistic model using a small set of linguistic features, demonstrating the 
importance of extensive linguistic information for detecting cognitive 
impairments relating to AD. We observed that fine-tuned BERT models numerically 
outperformed feature-based approaches on the AD detection task, but the 
difference was not statistically significant. Our main contribution is the 
observation that when tested on the same, demographically balanced dataset and 
tested on independent, unseen data, both domain knowledge and pretrained 
linguistic models have good predictive performance for detecting AD based on 
speech. It is notable that linguistic information alone is capable of achieving 
comparable, and even numerically better, performance than models including both 
acoustic and linguistic features here. We also try to shed light on the inner 
workings of the more black-box natural language processing model by performing 
an interpretability analysis, and find that attention weights reveal interesting 
patterns such as higher attribution to more important information content units 
in the picture description task, as well as pauses and filler words. Conclusion: 
This approach supports the value of well-performing machine learning and 
linguistically-focussed processing techniques to detect AD from speech and 
highlights the need to compare model performance on carefully balanced datasets, 
using consistent same training parameters and independent test datasets in order 
to determine the best performing predictive model.
224
The importance of early interventions in Alzheimer's disease (AD) emphasizes the 
need to accurately and efficiently identify at-risk individuals. Although many 
dementia prediction models have been developed, there are fewer studies focusing 
on detection of brain pathology. We developed a model for identification of 
amyloid-PET positivity using data on demographics, vascular factors, cognition, 
APOE genotype, and structural MRI, including regional brain volumes, cortical 
thickness and a visual medial temporal lobe atrophy (MTA) rating. We also 
analyzed the relative importance of different factors when added to the overall 
model. The model used baseline data from the Finnish Geriatric Intervention 
Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER) exploratory PET 
sub-study. Participants were at risk for dementia, but without dementia or 
cognitive impairment. Their mean age was 71 years. Participants underwent a 
brain 3T MRI and PiB-PET imaging. PiB images were visually determined as 
positive or negative. Cognition was measured using a modified version of the 
Neuropsychological Test Battery. Body mass index (BMI) and hypertension were 
used as cardiovascular risk factors in the model. Demographic factors included 
age, gender and years of education. The model was built using the Disease State 
Index (DSI) machine learning algorithm. Of the 48 participants, 20 (42%) were 
rated as Aβ positive. Compared with the Aβ negative group, the Aβ positive group 
had a higher proportion of APOE ε4 carriers (53 vs. 14%), lower executive 
functioning, lower brain volumes, and higher visual MTA rating. AUC [95% CI] for 
the complete model was 0.78 [0.65-0.91]. MRI was the most effective factor, 
especially brain volumes and visual MTA rating but not cortical thickness. APOE 
was nearly as effective as MRI in improving detection of amyloid positivity. The 
model with the best performance (AUC 0.82 [0.71-0.93]) was achieved by combining 
APOE and MRI. Our findings suggest that combining demographic data, vascular 
risk factors, cognitive performance, APOE genotype, and brain MRI measures can 
help identify Aβ positivity. Detecting amyloid positivity could reduce invasive 
and costly assessments during the screening process in clinical trials.
225
STUDY OBJECTIVES: Epidemiological studies have found that insufficient sleep (< 
7 h/night) is more common among American Indians/Alaska Natives (AI/AN). In this 
study we sought to identify specific demographic, clinical, and cultural factors 
that may be associated with reduced sleep quality in an American Indian 
community sample.
METHODS: Information on demography along with personal medical, psychiatric, and 
drinking history was obtained using the Semi-Structured Assessment for the 
Genetics of Alcoholism (SSAGA). Sleep quality was assessed by the Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Index (PSQI).
RESULTS: The adult participants (n = 386, 54% women) had a mean ± standard 
deviation age of 31.35 ± 14.4 y. Higher degrees of AI ancestry, but not cultural 
identification, being older than 30 y, and having a high school diploma all were 
factors predictive of having a short sleep duration (< 6 h). The global score on 
the PSQI was significantly higher in those participants with a lifetime 
diagnosis of substance use disorders, anxiety disorders, and affective 
disorders. Alcohol use disorders and affective disorders were significant 
predictors of sleep latency whereas anxiety and affective disorders were 
correlated with waking more often in the night/early morning. Nicotine 
dependence was associated with having trouble breathing, and alcohol use 
disorders and anxiety disorders with bad dreams.
CONCLUSIONS: Alcohol use disorders are associated with poorer quality of sleep 
in this population and substance use disorders were associated with different 
aspects of sleep than anxiety and depressive disorders. These findings add to 
the understanding of the interactions between sleep and substance use, anxiety, 
and affective disorders in an understudied and underserved population.
226
OBJECTIVES: Comorbid depression is a highly prevalent and debilitating condition 
in middle-aged and elderly adults, particularly when associated with obesity, 
diabetes, and sleep disturbances. In this context, there is a growing need to 
develop efficient screening methods for cases based on clinical health markers 
for these comorbidities and sleep data. Thus, our objective was to detect 
depressive symptoms in these subjects, considering general biomarkers of obesity 
and diabetes and variables related to sleep and physical exercise through a 
machine learning approach.
METHODS: We used the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 
2015-2016 data. Eighteen variables on self-reported physical activity, 
self-reported sleep habits, sleep disturbance indicative, anthropometric 
measurements, sociodemographic characteristics and plasma biomarkers of obesity 
and diabetes were selected as predictors. A total of 2907 middle-aged and 
elderly subjects were eligible for the study. Supervised learning algorithms 
such as Lasso penalized Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF) and Extreme 
Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) were implemented.
RESULTS: XGBoost provided greater accuracy and precision (87%), with a 
proportion of hits in cases with depressive symptoms above 80%. In addition, 
daytime sleepiness was the most significant predictor variable for predicting 
depressive symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Sleep and physical activity variables, in addition to obesity and 
diabetes biomarkers, together assume significant importance to predict, with 
accuracy and precision of 87%, the occurrence of depressive symptoms in 
middle-aged and elderly individuals.
227
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia. 
Preclinical AD is the period during which early AD brain changes are present but 
cognitive symptoms have not yet manifest. The presence of AD brain changes can 
be ascertained by molecular biomarkers obtained via imaging and lumbar puncture. 
However, the use of these methods is limited by cost, acceptability, and 
availability. The preclinical stage of AD may have a subtle functional 
signature, which can impact complex behaviours such as driving. The objective of 
the present study was to evaluate the ability of in-vehicle GPS data loggers to 
distinguish cognitively normal older drivers with preclinical AD from those 
without preclinical AD using machine learning methods.
METHODS: We followed naturalistic driving in cognitively normal older drivers 
for 1 year with a commercial in-vehicle GPS data logger. The cohort included n = 
64 individuals with and n = 75 without preclinical AD, as determined by 
cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers. Four Random Forest (RF) models were trained to 
detect preclinical AD. RF Gini index was used to identify the strongest 
predictors of preclinical AD.
RESULTS: The F1 score of the RF models for identifying preclinical AD was 0.85 
using APOE ε4 status and age only, 0.82 using GPS-based driving indicators only, 
0.88 using age and driving indicators, and 0.91 using age, APOE ε4 status, and 
driving. The area under the receiver operating curve for the final model was 
0.96.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that GPS driving may serve as an effective and 
accurate digital biomarker for identifying preclinical AD among older adults.
228
Several recent studies indicate that atypical changes in driving behaviors 
appear to be early signs of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia. These 
studies, however, are limited by small sample sizes and short follow-up 
duration. This study aims to develop an interaction-based classification method 
building on a statistic named Influence Score (i.e., I-score) for prediction of 
MCI and dementia using naturalistic driving data collected from the Longitudinal 
Research on Aging Drivers (LongROAD) project. Naturalistic driving trajectories 
were collected through in-vehicle recording devices for up to 44 months from 
2977 participants who were cognitively intact at the time of enrollment. These 
data were further processed and aggregated to generate 31 time-series driving 
variables. Because of high dimensional time-series features for driving 
variables, we used I-score for variable selection. I-score is a measure to 
evaluate variables' ability to predict and is proven to be effective in 
differentiating between noisy and predictive variables in big data. It is 
introduced here to select influential variable modules or groups that account 
for compound interactions among explanatory variables. It is explainable 
regarding to what extent variables and their interactions contribute to the 
predictiveness of a classifier. In addition, I-score boosts the performance of 
classifiers over imbalanced datasets due to its association with the F1 score. 
Using predictive variables selected by I-score, interaction-based residual 
blocks are constructed over top I-score modules to generate predictors and 
ensemble learning aggregates these predictors to boost the prediction of the 
overall classifier. Experiments using naturalistic driving data show that our 
proposed classification method achieves the best accuracy (96%) for predicting 
MCI and dementia, followed by random forest (93%) and logistic regression (88%). 
In terms of F1 score and AUC, our proposed classifier achieves 98% and 87%, 
respectively, followed by random forest (with an F1 score of 96% and an AUC of 
79%) and logistic regression (with an F1 score of 92% and an AUC of 77%). The 
results indicate that incorporating I-score into machine learning algorithms 
could considerably improve the model performance for predicting MCI and dementia 
in older drivers. We also performed the feature importance analysis and found 
that the right to left turn ratio and the number of hard braking events are the 
most important driving variables to predict MCI and dementia.
229
INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to (1) replicate previous associations 
between six blood lipids and Alzheimer's disease (AD) (Proitsi et al 2015) and 
(2) identify novel associations between lipids, clinical AD diagnosis, disease 
progression and brain atrophy (left/right hippocampus/entorhinal cortex).
METHODS: We performed untargeted lipidomic analysis on 148 AD and 152 elderly 
control plasma samples and used univariate and multivariate analysis methods.
RESULTS: We replicated our previous lipids associations and reported novel 
associations between lipids molecules and all phenotypes. A combination of 24 
molecules classified AD patients with >70% accuracy in a test and a validation 
data set, and we identified lipid signatures that predicted disease progression 
(R2 = 0.10, test data set) and brain atrophy (R2 ≥ 0.14, all test data sets 
except left entorhinal cortex). We putatively identified a number of metabolic 
features including cholesteryl esters/triglycerides and phosphatidylcholines.
DISCUSSION: Blood lipids are promising AD biomarkers that may lead to new 
treatment strategies.
230
INTRODUCTION: American Indian (AI) people have protective factors embedded in 
cultural teachings that buffer against high-risk behaviors. This study applies a 
qualitative, grounded theory approach to identify cultural assets for a Diné 
(Navajo) mother-daughter intervention aimed at preventing substance abuse and 
teen pregnancy.
METHOD: Focus groups and in-depth interviews were conducted with 28 AI females' 
ages 8 years and older from the Navajo Nation.
RESULTS: Key themes were (a) preserving the Diné way of life, (b) cultural 
assets related to being a healthy Diné woman, (c) matrilineal networks as a 
source of strength/pride, (d) historical trauma as a source of resilience, (e) 
male influences as protective health factors, (f) Western education as a measure 
of success, and (g) integrating different belief systems.
DISCUSSION: Study findings may be applied as foundational elements for 
culturally grounded AI substance abuse and teen pregnancy prevention strategies, 
as well as culturally safe nursing practice.
231
BACKGROUND: Alaska Native and American Indian (AN/AI) people represent a rapidly 
aging population with disproportionate burdens of Alzheimer's disease and 
related dementias (ADRD) risk factors.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize healthcare service use patterns and mortality in the 
years following ADRD diagnosis for patients in an Alaska Native Tribal health 
system.
METHODS: The study sample included all AN/AI patients aged 55 or older with an 
ADRD diagnosis who were seen between 2012-2018 (n = 407). We used cluster 
analysis to identify distinct patterns of healthcare use for primary care, 
emergency and urgent care, inpatient hospital stays, and selected specialty 
care. We compared demographic and clinical factors between clusters and used 
regression to compare mortality.
RESULTS: We identified five clusters of healthcare service use patterns after 
ADRD diagnosis: 1) people who use a low amount of all services (n = 107), 2) 
people who use a high amount of all services (n = 60), 3) people who use a high 
amount of primary and specialty care (n = 105), 4) people who use a high amount 
of specialty care (n = 65), and 5) people who use a high amount of emergency and 
urgent care (n = 70). The cluster with the highest use had the greatest 
proportion of comorbidities and had a 2.3-fold increased risk of mortality 
compared to the cluster with the lowest healthcare service use.
CONCLUSION: Results indicate that those receiving the most services had the 
greatest healthcare-related needs and increased mortality. Future research could 
isolate factors that predict service use following ADRD diagnosis and identify 
other differential health risks.
232
The elderly population in South Korea accounted for 15.5% of the total 
population in 2019. Thus, it is important to study the various elements 
governing the process of healthy aging. Therefore, this study investigated 
multiple prediction models to determine the health-related quality of life 
(HRQoL) in elderly adults based on the demographics, questionnaires, gait 
ability, and physical fitness. We performed eight physical fitness tests on 775 
participants wearing shoe-type inertial measurement units and completing walking 
tasks at slower, preferred, and faster speeds. The HRQoL for physical and mental 
components was evaluated using a 36-item, short-form health survey. The 
prediction models based on multiple linear regression with feature importance 
were analyzed considering the best physical and mental components. We used 11 
variables and 5 variables to form the best subset of features underlying the 
physical and mental components, respectively. We laid particular emphasis on 
evaluating the functional endurance, muscle strength, stress level, and falling 
risk. Furthermore, stress, insomnia severity, number of diseases, lower body 
strength, and fear of falling were taken into consideration in addition to 
mental-health-related variables. Thus, the study findings provide reliable and 
objective results to improve the understanding of HRQoL in elderly adults.
233
The number of people with dementia is increasing each year, and early detection 
allows for early intervention and treatment. Since conventional screening 
methods are time-consuming and expensive, a simple and inexpensive screening is 
expected. We created a standardized intake questionnaire with thirty questions 
in five categories and used machine learning to categorize older adults with 
moderate and mild dementia and mild cognitive impairment, based on speech 
patterns. To evaluate the feasibility of the developed interview items and the 
accuracy of the classification model based on acoustic features, 29 participants 
(7 males and 22 females) aged 72 to 91 years were recruited with the approval of 
the University of Tokyo Hospital. The MMSE results showed that 12 participants 
had moderate dementia with MMSE scores of 20 or less, 8 participants had mild 
dementia with MMSE scores between 21 and 23, and 9 participants had MCI with 
MMSE scores between 24 and 27. As a result, Mel-spectrogram generally 
outperformed MFCC in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score in all 
classification tasks. The multi-classification using Mel-spectrogram achieved 
the highest accuracy of 0.932, while the binary classification of moderate 
dementia and MCI group using MFCC achieved the lowest accuracy of 0.502. The FDR 
was generally low for all classification tasks, indicating a low rate of false 
positives. However, the FNR was relatively high in some cases, indicating a 
higher rate of false negatives.
234
In order to develop a predictive model that can distinguish Parkinson's disease 
dementia (PDD) from other dementia types, such as Alzheimer's dementia (AD), it 
is necessary to evaluate and identify the predictive accuracy of the cognitive 
profile while considering the non-motor symptoms, such as depression and rapid 
eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorders. This study compared Parkinson's 
disease (PD)'s non-motor symptoms and the diagnostic predictive power of 
cognitive profiles that distinguish AD and PD using machine learning. This study 
analyzed 118 patients with AD and 110 patients with PDD, and all subjects were 
60 years or older. In order to develop the PDD prediction model, the dataset was 
divided into training data (70%) and test data (30%). The prediction accuracy of 
the model was calculated by the recognition rate. The results of this study show 
that Parkinson-related non-motor symptoms, such as REM sleep behavior disorders, 
and cognitive screening tests, such as Korean version of Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment, were highly accurate factors for predicting PDD. It is required to 
develop customized screening tests that can detect PDD in the early stage based 
on these results. Furthermore, it is believed that including biomarkers such as 
brain images or cerebrospinal fluid as input variables will be more useful for 
developing PDD prediction models in the future.
235
Connectivity in intrinsically connected networks (ICNs) may predict individual 
differences in cognition and behavior. The drastic alterations in socioemotional 
awareness of patients with behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) 
are presumed to arise from changes in one such ICN, the salience network (SN). 
We examined how individual differences in SN connectivity are reflected in overt 
social behavior in healthy individuals and patients, both to provide 
neuroscientific insight into this key brain-behavior relationship, and to 
provide a practical tool to diagnose patients with early bvFTD. We measured SN 
functional connectivity and socioemotional sensitivity in 65 healthy older 
adults and 103 patients in the earliest stage [Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) 
Scale score ≤1] of five neurodegenerative diseases [14 bvFTD, 29 Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), 20 progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 21 semantic variant 
primary progressive aphasia (svPPA), and 19 non-fluent variant primary 
progressive aphasia (nfvPPA)]. All participants underwent resting-state 
functional imaging and an informant described their responsiveness to subtle 
emotional expressions using the Revised Self-Monitoring Scale (RSMS). Higher 
functional connectivity in the SN, predominantly between the right anterior 
insula (AI) and both "hub" cortical and "interoceptive" subcortical nodes, 
predicted socioemotional sensitivity among healthy individuals, showing that 
socioemotional sensitivity is a behavioral marker of SN function, and 
particularly of right AI functional connectivity. The continuity of this 
relationship in both healthy and neurologically affected individuals highlights 
the role of socioemotional sensitivity as an early diagnostic marker of SN 
connectivity. Clinically, this is particularly important for identification of 
patients in the earliest stage of bvFTD, where the SN is selectively vulnerable.
236
OBJECTIVE: Recognizing frailty, also known as clinical geriatric syndrome in the 
elderly that is characterized by high vulnerability and low resilience, and its 
extensive influence in clinical practice is challenging. This study aims to 
develop a social frailty prediction system based on machine learning approaches 
in order to identify the social frailty status of the elders in order to advance 
appropriate social services provision.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This cross-sectional study enrolled and collected 
information from 595 community-dwelling seniors aged 65+. Fourteen predictors 
established from questionnaires and electronic medical records were used to 
predict the social frailty of participants. Bagged classification and regression 
trees, model average neural network, random forest, C5.0, eXtreme gradient 
boosting, and stochastic gradient boosting were used to build the predictive 
model in use. Performance was compared using accuracy, kappa, area under 
receiver operating characteristic curve, sensitivity, and specificity. The 
frailty predictive system was web-based and built upon representational state 
transfer application program interfaces.
RESULTS: C5.0 achieved the best overall performance than remaining learners, and 
was adopted as the base learner for the social frailty prediction system. In 
terms of the area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC), health 
literacy (AUC = 0.68) was found to be the most important variable for predicting 
one's social frailty, followed by comorbidity (AUC = 0.67), religious 
participation (AUC = 0.67), physical activity (AUC = 0.66), and geriatric 
depression score (AUC = 0.62).
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that a combination of such data that is both 
available and unavailable from electronic medical records is predictive of the 
social frailty of an elderly population.
237
Early diagnosis of dementia is critical for assessing disease progression and 
potential treatment. State-or-the-art machine learning techniques have been 
increasingly employed to take on this diagnostic task. In this study, we 
employed Generalized Matrix Learning Vector Quantization (GMLVQ) classifiers to 
discriminate patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) from healthy controls 
based on their cognitive skills. Further, we adopted a "Learning with privileged 
information" approach to combine cognitive and fMRI data for the classification 
task. The resulting classifier operates solely on the cognitive data while it 
incorporates the fMRI data as privileged information (PI) during training. This 
novel classifier is of practical use as the collection of brain imaging data is 
not always possible with patients and older participants. MCI patients and 
healthy age-matched controls were trained to extract structure from temporal 
sequences. We ask whether machine learning classifiers can be used to 
discriminate patients from controls and whether differences between these groups 
relate to individual cognitive profiles. To this end, we tested participants in 
four cognitive tasks: working memory, cognitive inhibition, divided attention, 
and selective attention. We also collected fMRI data before and after training 
on a probabilistic sequence learning task and extracted fMRI responses and 
connectivity as features for machine learning classifiers. Our results show that 
the PI guided GMLVQ classifiers outperform the baseline classifier that only 
used the cognitive data. In addition, we found that for the baseline classifier, 
divided attention is the only relevant cognitive feature. When PI was 
incorporated, divided attention remained the most relevant feature while 
cognitive inhibition became also relevant for the task. Interestingly, this 
analysis for the fMRI GMLVQ classifier suggests that (1) when overall fMRI 
signal is used as inputs to the classifier, the post-training session is most 
relevant; and (2) when the graph feature reflecting underlying spatiotemporal 
fMRI pattern is used, the pre-training session is most relevant. Taken together 
these results suggest that brain connectivity before training and overall fMRI 
signal after training are both diagnostic of cognitive skills in MCI.
238
Erratum for
239
240
We previously developed a novel machine-learning-based brain age model that was 
sensitive to amyloid. We aimed to independently validate it and to demonstrate 
its utility using independent clinical data. We recruited 650 participants from 
South Korean memory clinics to undergo magnetic resonance imaging and clinical 
assessments. We employed a pretrained brain age model that used data from an 
independent set of largely Caucasian individuals (n = 757) who had no or 
relatively low levels of amyloid as confirmed by positron emission tomography 
(PET). We investigated the association between brain age residual and cognitive 
decline. We found that our pretrained brain age model was able to reliably 
estimate brain age (mean absolute error = 5.68 years, r(650) = 0.47, age 
range = 49-89 year) in the sample with 71 participants with subjective cognitive 
decline (SCD), 375 with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 204 with dementia. 
Greater brain age was associated with greater amyloid and worse cognitive 
function [Odds Ratio, (95% Confidence Interval {CI}): 1.28 (1.06-1.55), 
p = 0.030 for amyloid PET positivity; 2.52 (1.76-3.61), p < 0.001 for dementia]. 
Baseline brain age residual was predictive of future cognitive worsening even 
after adjusting for apolipoprotein E e4 and amyloid status [Hazard Ratio, (95% 
CI): 1.94 (1.33-2.81), p = 0.001 for total 336 follow-up sample; 2.31 
(1.44-3.71), p = 0.001 for 284 subsample with baseline Clinical Dementia 
Rating ≤ 0.5; 2.40 (1.43-4.03), p = 0.001 for 240 subsample with baseline SCD or 
MCI]. In independent data set, these results replicate our previous findings 
using this model, which was able to delineate significant differences in brain 
age according to the diagnostic stages of dementia as well as amyloid deposition 
status. Brain age models may offer benefits in discriminating and tracking 
cognitive impairment in older adults.
241
BACKGROUND: Depression in middle-aged and elderly individuals is multifaceted 
and heterogeneous, linked to biological age (BA) based on aging-related 
biomarkers. However, due to confounding with chronological age and the absence 
of subgroup analysis and causal reasoning, the association between BA and 
depressive symptoms (DS) might be unstable and requires further investigation.
METHODS: We utilized data from the China Health and Retirement Longitudinal 
Study (N = 9478) to perform association analysis, causal inference, and subgroup 
analysis. BA acceleration (BAA) was derived using machine learning and adjusted 
for chronological age. A generalized linear mixed-effects model (GLMM) tree 
algorithm was employed to identify subgroups. The causal reasoning frame 
included propensity score matching and fast large-scale almost matching exactly.
RESULTS: In the longitudinal analysis, BAA exhibited a consistent and 
significant positive association with DS, even after controlling for demographic 
characteristics, lifestyle factors, health status, and physical functions. This 
association remained unchanged within the causal framework. GLMM tree analysis 
identified three partitioning variables (sex, satisfaction, and BMI) and five 
subgroups. Further subgroup analysis revealed that BAA exerted the strongest 
effect on DS among women with less satisfying lives.
LIMITATIONS: Depressive symptoms were evaluated through scale measurements 
rather than clinical diagnosis. The sample was derived from the general 
population, not the clinically depressed population.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provided the first longitudinal evidence that biological 
age acceleration increases depressive symptoms under causal reasoning and 
subgroup analysis, particularly among less satisfied women. And the association 
between BAA and DS was independent of known risk factors.
242
BACKGROUND: Sleep and circadian disruption are associated with depression onset 
and severity, but it is unclear which features (e.g., sleep duration, 
chronotype) are important and whether they can identify individuals showing 
poorer outcomes.
METHODS: Within a subset of the UK Biobank with actigraphy and mental health 
data (n = 64,353), penalised regression identified the most useful of 51 
sleep/rest-activity predictors of depression-related outcomes; including 
case-control (Major Depression (MD) vs. controls; postnatal depression vs. 
controls) and within-case comparisons (severe vs. moderate MD; early vs. later 
onset, atypical vs. typical symptoms; comorbid anxiety; suicidality). Best 
models (of lasso, ridge, and elastic net) were selected based on Area Under the 
Curve (AUC).
RESULTS: For MD vs. controls (n(MD) = 24,229; n(control) = 40,124), lasso AUC 
was 0.68, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.67-0.69. Discrimination was reasonable 
for atypical vs. typical symptoms (n(atypical) = 958; n(typical) = 18,722; 
ridge: AUC 0.74, 95 % CI 0.71-0.77) but poor for remaining models (AUCs 
0.59-0.67). Key predictors across most models included: difficulty getting up, 
insomnia symptoms, snoring, actigraphy-measured daytime inactivity and lower 
morning activity (~8 am). In a distinct subset (n = 310,718), the number of 
these factors shown was associated with all depression outcomes.
LIMITATIONS: Analyses were cross-sectional and in middle-/older aged adults: 
comparison with longitudinal investigations and younger cohorts is necessary.
DISCUSSION: Sleep and circadian measures alone provided poor to moderate 
discrimination of depression outcomes, but several characteristics were 
identified that may be clinically useful. Future work should assess these 
features alongside broader sociodemographic, lifestyle and genetic features.
243
BACKGROUND: Chest radiograph (CXR) is a basic diagnostic test in 
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) with prognostic value. We developed a 
CXR-based artificial intelligence (AI) model (CAP AI predictive Engine: CAPE) 
and prospectively evaluated its discrimination for 30-day mortality.
METHODS: Deep-learning model using convolutional neural network (CNN) was 
trained with a retrospective cohort of 2235 CXRs from 1966 unique adult patients 
admitted for CAP from 1 January 2019 to 31 December 2019. A single-centre 
prospective cohort between 11 May 2020 and 15 June 2020 was analysed for model 
performance. CAPE mortality risk score based on CNN analysis of the first CXR 
performed for CAP was used to determine the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) for 30-day mortality.
RESULTS: 315 inpatient episodes for CAP occurred, with 30-day mortality of 19.4% 
(n=61/315). Non-survivors were older than survivors (mean (SD)age, 80.4 (10.3) 
vs 69.2 (18.7)); more likely to have dementia (n=27/61 vs n=58/254) and 
malignancies (n=16/61 vs n=18/254); demonstrate higher serum C reactive protein 
(mean (SD), 109 mg/L (98.6) vs 59.3 mg/L (69.7)) and serum procalcitonin (mean 
(SD), 11.3 (27.8) μg/L vs 1.4 (5.9) μg/L). The AUC for CAPE mortality risk score 
for 30-day mortality was 0.79 (95% CI 0.73 to 0.85, p<0.001); Pneumonia Severity 
Index (PSI) 0.80 (95% CI 0.74 to 0.86, p<0.001); Confusion of new onset, blood 
Urea nitrogen, Respiratory rate, Blood pressure, 65 (CURB-65) score 0.76 (95% CI 
0.70 to 0.81, p<0.001), respectively. CAPE combined with CURB-65 model has an 
AUC of 0.83 (95% CI 0.77 to 0.88, p<0.001). The best performing model was CAPE 
incorporated with PSI, with an AUC of 0.84 (95% CI 0.79 to 0.89, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: CXR-based CAPE mortality risk score was comparable to traditional 
pneumonia severity scores and improved its discrimination when combined.
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
244
Background: Hospitalization-associated disability (HAD) is associated with 
prolonged functional decline and increased mortality after discharge. Therefore, 
we examined the incidence and risk factors associated with HAD in elderly 
patients undergoing cardiac surgery in Japan. Methods and Results: We 
retrospectively examined 2,262 elderly patients who underwent elective cardiac 
surgery at Sakakibara Heart Institute. HAD was defined as a functional decline 
between time of admission and discharge measured by the Barthel Index. We 
analyzed clinical characteristics using machine learning algorithms to identify 
the risk factors associated with HAD. After excluding 203 patients, 2,059 
patients remained, of whom 108 (5.2%) developed HAD after cardiac surgery. The 
risk factors identified were age, serum albumin concentration, estimated 
glomerular filtration rate, Revised Hasegawa's Dementia Scale, N-terminal pro 
B-type natriuretic peptide, vital capacity, preoperative Short Physical 
Performance Battery (SPPB) score, operation times, cardiopulmonary bypass times, 
ventilator times, length of postoperative intensive care unit stay, and 
postoperative ambulation start day. The highest incidence of HAD was found in 
patients with an SPPB score ≤9 and in those who started ambulation >6 days after 
surgery (76.9%). Conclusions: Several risk factors for HAD are components of 
frailty, suggesting that preoperative rehabilitation to reduce the risk of HAD 
is feasible. Furthermore, the association between HAD and a delayed start of 
ambulation reaffirms the importance of early mobilization and rehabilitation.
245
BACKGROUND: Falls are the most common adverse outcome of depression in older 
adults, yet a accurate risk prediction model for falls stratified by distinct 
long-term trajectories of depressive symptoms is still lacking.
METHODS: We collected the data of 1617 participants from the China Health and 
Retirement Longitudinal Study register, spanning between 2011 and 2018. The 36 
input variables included in the baseline survey were regarded as candidate 
features. The trajectories of depressive symptoms were classified by the latent 
class growth model and growth mixture model. Three data balancing technologies 
and four machine learning algorithms were utilized to develop predictive models 
for fall classification of depressive prognosis.
RESULTS: Depressive symptom trajectories were divided into four categories, 
i.e., non-symptoms, new-onset increasing symptoms, slowly decreasing symptoms, 
and persistent high symptoms. The random forest-TomekLinks model achieved the 
best performance among the case and incident models with an AUC-ROC of 0.844 and 
0.731, respectively. In the chronic model, the gradient boosting decision 
tree-synthetic minority oversampling technique obtained an AUC-ROC of 0.783. In 
the three models, the depressive symptom score was the most crucial component. 
The lung function was a common and significant feature in both the case and the 
chronic models.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the ideal model has a good chance of 
identifying older persons with a high risk of falling stratified by long-term 
trajectories of depressive symptoms. Baseline depressive symptom score, lung 
function, income, and injury experience are influential factors associated with 
falls of depression evolution.
246
BACKGROUND: Recent studies have revealed lifestyle behavioral risk factors that 
can be modified to reduce the risk of dementia. As modification of lifestyle 
takes time, early identification of people with high dementia risk is important 
for timely intervention and support. As cognitive impairment is a diagnostic 
criterion of dementia, cognitive assessment tools are used in primary care to 
screen for clinically unevaluated cases. Among them, Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) is a very common instrument. However, MMSE is a questionnaire 
that is administered when symptoms of memory decline have occurred. Early 
administration at the asymptomatic stage and repeated measurements would lead to 
a practice effect that degrades the effectiveness of MMSE when it is used at 
later stages.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to exploit machine learning techniques to 
assist health care professionals in detecting high-risk individuals by 
predicting the results of MMSE using elderly health data collected from 
community-based primary care services.
METHODS: A health data set of 2299 samples was adopted in the study. The input 
data were divided into two groups of different characteristics (ie, client 
profile data and health assessment data). The predictive output was the result 
of two-class classification of the normal and high-risk cases that were defined 
based on MMSE. A dual neural network (DNN) model was proposed to obtain the 
latent representations of the two groups of input data separately, which were 
then concatenated for the two-class classification. Mean and k-nearest neighbor 
were used separately to tackle missing data, whereas a cost-sensitive learning 
(CSL) algorithm was proposed to deal with class imbalance. The performance of 
the DNN was evaluated by comparing it with that of conventional machine learning 
methods.
RESULTS: A total of 16 predictive models were built using the elderly health 
data set. Among them, the proposed DNN with CSL outperformed in the detection of 
high-risk cases. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, 
average precision, sensitivity, and specificity reached 0.84, 0.88, 0.73, and 
0.80, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed method has the potential to serve as a tool to screen 
for elderly people with cognitive impairment and predict high-risk cases of 
dementia at the asymptomatic stage, providing health care professionals with 
early signals that can prompt suggestions for a follow-up or a detailed 
diagnosis.
in JMIR Medical Informatics (http://medinform.jmir.org), 31.08.2020.
247
BACKGROUND: Social distancing and shielding measures have been put in place to 
reduce social interaction and slow the transmission of the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19). For older people, self-isolation presents particular challenges for 
mental health and social relationships. As time progresses, continued social 
distancing could have a compounding impact on these concerns.
OBJECTIVE: This project aims to provide a tool for older people and their 
families and peers to improve their well-being and health during and after 
regulated social distancing. First, we will evaluate the tool's feasibility, 
acceptability, and usability to encourage positive nutrition, enhance physical 
activity, and enable virtual interaction while social distancing. Second, we 
will be implementing the app to provide an online community to assist families 
and peer groups in maintaining contact with older people using goal setting. 
Anonymized data from the app will be aggregated with other real-world data 
sources to develop a machine learning algorithm to improve the identification of 
patients with COVID-19 and track for real time use by health systems.
METHODS: Development of this project is occurring at the time of publication, 
and therefore, a case study design was selected to provide a systematic means of 
capturing software engineering in progress. The app development framework for 
software design was based on agile methods. The evaluation of the app's 
feasibility, acceptability and usability shall be conducted using Public Health 
England's guidance on evaluating digital health products, Bandura's model of 
health promotion, the Reach Effectiveness Adoption Implementation Maintenance 
(RE-AIM) framework and the Nonadoption, Abandonment and Challenges to the 
Scale-up, Spread and Suitability (NASSS) framework.
RESULTS: Making use of a pre-existing software framework for health behavior 
change, a proof of concept was developed, and a multistage app development and 
deployment for the solution was created. Grant submissions to fund the project 
and study execution have been sought at the time of publication, and 
prediscovery iteration of the solution has begun. Ethical approval for a 
feasibility study design is being sought.
CONCLUSIONS: This case study lays the foundations for future app development to 
combat mental and societal issues arising from social distancing measures. The 
app will be tested and evaluated in future studies to allow continuous 
improvement of the app. This novel contribution will provide an evidence-based 
exemplar for future app development in the space of social isolation and 
loneliness.
published in JMIR Public Health and Surveillance (http://publichealth.jmir.org), 
248
Opioid use among youth, particularly among American Indian (AI) youth, is 
rising, resulting in a large number of accidental overdoses and deaths. In order 
to develop effective prevention strategies, we need to use exploratory data 
analysis to identify previously unknown predictors of opioid use among youth 
living on or near reservations. The present study is an application of Machine 
Learning, a type of exploratory data analysis, to the Our Youth, Our Future 
epidemiological survey (N = 6482) to determine salient risk and protective 
factors for past 30-day opioid use. The Machine Learning algorithm identified 11 
salient risk and protective factors. Importantly, highest risk was conferred for 
those reporting recent cocaine use, having ever tried a narcotic other than 
heroin, and identifying as American Indian. Protective factors included never 
having tried opioids other than heroin, infrequent binge drinking, having fewer 
friends pressuring you to use illicit drugs, initiating alcohol use at a later 
age, and being older. This model explained 61% of the variance in the training 
sample and, on average, 24% of the variance in the bootstrapped samples. Taken 
together, this model identifies known predictors of 30-day opioid use, for 
example, recent substance use, as well as unknown predictors including being AI, 
Snapchat use, and peer encouragement for use. Notably, recent cocaine use was a 
more salient predictor of recent opioid use than lifetime opioid use.
249
BACKGROUND: Older adults have worse outcomes following hospitalization with 
COVID-19, but within this group there is substantial variation. Although frailty 
and comorbidity are key determinants of mortality, it is less clear which 
specific manifestations of frailty and comorbidity are associated with the worst 
outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify the key comorbidities and domains of frailty 
that were associated with in-hospital mortality in older patients with COVID-19 
using models developed for machine learning algorithms.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study that used the Hospital Episode 
Statistics administrative data set from March 1, 2020, to February 28, 2021, for 
hospitalized patients in England aged 65 years or older. The data set was split 
into separate training (70%), test (15%), and validation (15%) data sets during 
model development. Global frailty was assessed using the Hospital Frailty Risk 
Score (HFRS) and specific domains of frailty were identified using the Global 
Frailty Scale (GFS). Comorbidity was assessed using the Charlson Comorbidity 
Index (CCI). Additional features employed in the random forest algorithms 
included age, sex, deprivation, ethnicity, discharge month and year, 
geographical region, hospital trust, disease severity, and International 
Statistical Classification of Disease, 10th Edition codes recorded during the 
admission. Features were selected, preprocessed, and input into a series of 
random forest classification algorithms developed to identify factors strongly 
associated with in-hospital mortality. Two models were developed; the first 
model included the demographic, hospital-related, and disease-related items 
described above, as well as individual GFS domains and CCI items. The second 
model was similar to the first but replaced the GFS domains and CCI items with 
the HFRS as a global measure of frailty. Model performance was assessed using 
the area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) curve and measures 
of model accuracy.
RESULTS: In total, 215,831 patients were included. The model using the 
individual GFS domains and CCI items had an AUROC curve for in-hospital 
mortality of 90% and a predictive accuracy of 83%. The model using the HFRS had 
similar performance (AUROC curve 90%, predictive accuracy 82%). The most 
important frailty items in the GFS were dementia/delirium, falls/fractures, and 
pressure ulcers/weight loss. The most important comorbidity items in the CCI 
were cancer, heart failure, and renal disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The physical manifestations of frailty and comorbidity, 
particularly a history of cognitive impairment and falls, may be useful in 
identification of patients who need additional support during hospitalization 
with COVID-19.
Annakan V Navaratnam, Tim W R Briggs, Jeremy Yates, Jamie Day, Andrew Wheeler, 
250
BACKGROUND: Older adults are at higher risk for health issues, including mental 
health problems. This was especially apparent during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
where older adults were simultaneously more vulnerable to the disease and the 
mental health concerns created by social distancing. Subsequently, the use of 
digital communication technology (DCT) became a critical option for maintaining 
social connectedness in older adults. Prior to the pandemic, the low uptake and 
use of technology by older adults was an established problem, known as the 
digital divide. However, not much is known about how this may have changed as a 
result of the pandemic.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore how older adults maintained social 
connectedness through DCT during the pandemic and to understand factors 
influencing the use and acceptance of DCT.
METHODS: A mixed methods explorative field study was set up, involving surveys 
and interviews of 25 community-dwelling older adults (65-88 years old) living in 
the United Kingdom. The surveys included the internet acceptance questionnaire 
(based on the Technology Acceptance Model [TAM]); COVID-19 dysfunctional anxiety 
was captured using the COVID-19 Anxiety Scale (CAS). Background information 
(demographics, use of technology) was gathered before conducting semistructured 
interviews. We hypothesized that CAS would affect constructs of TAM and that 
predictive constructs of TAM would have remained valid during the pandemic. We 
also posited that there would be unidentified themes outside TAM that impacted 
the acceptance and use of DCT. We used the quantitative data to guide the 
semistructured interviews, which were then analyzed through thematic analysis to 
identify additional themes.
RESULTS: Correlational analysis showed that CAS influences all constructs of 
TAM. We also saw that the predictive constructs of TAM, especially the perceived 
ease of use (PEU) and perceived usefulness (PU), remained valid during the 
pandemic. Common acceptance-influencing themes were encountered in both 
quantitative and qualitative analyses, with 3 matching the known constructs of 
TAM (PU, PEU, and behavioral intention). We identified 2 additional themes 
affecting acceptance, namely influence of the pandemic (situational context) and 
privacy and security concerns. DCT use (especially email and videoconferencing 
use) increased during the pandemic, but the results related to social networking 
sites were mixed.
CONCLUSIONS: The COVID-19 pandemic impacted technology acceptance and use by 
older adults, encouraging their use of certain DCT apps (email and 
videoconferencing apps, such as WhatsApp). These apps helped insulate them from 
adverse effects (social isolation and loneliness). Other social networking apps, 
however, exerted a negative influence, increasing anxiety and a general feeling 
of negativity. Future studies should maximize older adult agency related to 
design, privacy, security, and user requirements for development. We also 
recommend that when studying DCT acceptance for older adults, our additional 
identified themes should be considered alongside the existing TAM constructs.
251
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in the 
elderly and affects approximately 30 million individuals worldwide. Mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) is very frequently a prodromal phase of AD, and 
existing studies have suggested that people with MCI tend to progress to AD at a 
rate of about 10-15% per year. However, the ability of clinicians and machine 
learning systems to predict AD based on MRI biomarkers at an early stage is 
still a challenging problem that can have a great impact in improving 
treatments.
METHOD: The proposed system, developed by the SiPBA-UGR team for this challenge, 
is based on feature standardization, ANOVA feature selection, partial least 
squares feature dimension reduction and an ensemble of One vs. Rest random 
forest classifiers. With the aim of improving its performance when 
discriminating healthy controls (HC) from MCI, a second binary classification 
level was introduced that reconsiders the HC and MCI predictions of the first 
level.
RESULTS: The system was trained and evaluated on an ADNI datasets that consist 
of T1-weighted MRI morphological measurements from HC, stable MCI, converter MCI 
and AD subjects. The proposed system yields a 56.25% classification score on the 
test subset which consists of 160 real subjects.
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHOD(S): The classifier yielded the best performance 
when compared to: (i) One vs. One (OvO), One vs. Rest (OvR) and error correcting 
output codes (ECOC) as strategies for reducing the multiclass classification 
task to multiple binary classification problems, (ii) support vector machines, 
gradient boosting classifier and random forest as base binary classifiers, and 
(iii) bagging ensemble learning.
CONCLUSIONS: A robust method has been proposed for the international challenge 
on MCI prediction based on MRI data. The system yielded the second best 
performance during the competition with an accuracy rate of 56.25% when 
evaluated on the real subjects of the test set.
252
Older adults with anxiety have lower gray matter brain volume-a component of 
accelerated aging. We have previously validated a machine learning model to 
predict brain age, an estimate of an individual's age based on voxel-wise gray 
matter images. We investigated associations between brain age and anxiety, 
depression, stress, and emotion regulation. We recruited 78 participants 
(≥50 years) along a wide range of worry severity. We collected imaging data and 
computed voxel-wise gray matter images, which were input into an existing 
machine learning model to estimate brain age. We conducted a multivariable 
linear regression between brain age and age, sex, race, education, worry, 
anxiety, depression, rumination, neuroticism, stress, reappraisal, and 
suppression. We found that greater brain age was significantly associated with 
greater age, male sex, greater worry, greater rumination, and lower suppression. 
Male sex, worry, and rumination are associated with accelerated aging in late 
life and expressive suppression may have a protective effect. These results 
provide evidence for the transdiagnostic model of negative repetitive thoughts, 
which are associated with cognitive decline, amyloid, and tau.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
253
The current diagnosis process of dementia is resulting in a high percentage of 
cases with delayed detection. To address this problem, in this paper, we explore 
the feasibility of autonomously detecting mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in the 
older adult population. We implement a signal processing approach equipped with 
a machine learning paradigm to process and analyze real-world data acquired 
using home-based unobtrusive sensing technologies. Using the sensor and clinical 
data pertaining to 97 subjects, acquired over an average period of three years, 
a number of measures associated with the subjects' walking speed and general 
activity in the home were calculated. Different time spans of these measures 
were used to generate feature vectors to train and test two machine learning 
algorithms namely support vector machines and random forests. We were able to 
autonomously detect MCI in older adults with an area under the ROC curve of 0.97 
and an area under the precision-recall curve of 0.93 using a time window of 24 
weeks. This study is of great significance since it can potentially assist in 
the early detection of cognitive impairment in older adults.
254
BACKGROUND: The combined analysis of imaging and functional modalities is 
supposed to improve diagnostics of neurodegenerative diseases with advanced data 
science techniques.
OBJECTIVE: To get an insight into normal and accelerated brain aging by 
developing the machine learning models that predict individual performance in 
neuropsychological and cognitive tests from brain MRI. With these models we 
endeavor to look for patterns of brain structure-function association (SFA) 
indicative of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's dementia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We explored the age-related variability of cognitive and 
neuropsychological test scores in normal and accelerated aging and constructed 
regression models predicting functional performance in cognitive tests from 
brain radiomics data. The models were trained on the three study cohorts from 
ADNI dataset-cognitively normal individuals, patients with MCI or 
dementia-separately. We also looked for significant correlations between 
cortical parcellation volumes and test scores in the cohorts to investigate 
neuroanatomical differences in relation to cognitive status. Finally, we worked 
out an approach for the classification of the examinees according to the pattern 
of structure-function associations into the cohorts of the cognitively normal 
elderly and patients with MCI or dementia.
RESULTS: In the healthy population, the global cognitive functioning slightly 
changes with age. It also remains stable across the disease course in the 
majority of cases. In healthy adults and patients with MCI or dementia, the 
trendlines of performance in digit symbol substitution test and trail making 
test converge at the approximated point of 100 years of age. According to the 
SFA pattern, we distinguish three cohorts: the cognitively normal elderly, 
patients with MCI, and dementia. The highest accuracy is achieved with the model 
trained to predict the mini-mental state examination score from voxel-based 
morphometry data. The application of the majority voting technique to models 
predicting results in cognitive tests improved the classification performance up 
to 91.95% true positive rate for healthy participants, 86.21%-for MCI and 
80.18%-for dementia cases.
CONCLUSION: The machine learning model, when trained on the cases of this of 
that group, describes a disease-specific SFA pattern. The pattern serves as a 
"stamp" of the disease reflected by the model.
255
BACKGROUND: SymptomGuide Dementia (DGI Clinical Inc) is a publicly available 
online symptom tracking tool to support caregivers of persons living with 
dementia. The value of such data are enhanced when the specific dementia stage 
is identified.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to develop a supervised machine learning algorithm to 
classify dementia stages based on tracked symptoms.
METHODS: We employed clinical data from 717 people from 3 sources: (1) a memory 
clinic; (2) long-term care; and (3) an open-label trial of donepezil in vascular 
and mixed dementia (VASPECT). Symptoms were captured with SymptomGuide Dementia. 
A clinician classified participants into 4 groups using either the Functional 
Assessment Staging Test or the Global Deterioration Scale as mild cognitive 
impairment, mild dementia, moderate dementia, or severe dementia. Individualized 
symptom profiles from the pooled data were used to train machine learning models 
to predict dementia severity. Models trained with 6 different machine learning 
algorithms were compared using nested cross-validation to identify the best 
performing model. Model performance was assessed using measures of balanced 
accuracy, precision, recall, Cohen κ, area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUROC), and area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC). 
The best performing algorithm was used to train a model optimized for balanced 
accuracy.
RESULTS: The study population was mostly female (424/717, 59.1%), older adults 
(mean 77.3 years, SD 10.6, range 40-100) with mild to moderate dementia 
(332/717, 46.3%). Age, duration of symptoms, 37 unique dementia symptoms, and 10 
symptom-derived variables were used to distinguish dementia stages. A model 
trained with a support vector machine learning algorithm using a one-versus-rest 
approach showed the best performance. The correct dementia stage was identified 
with 83% balanced accuracy (Cohen κ=0.81, AUPRC 0.91, AUROC 0.96). The best 
performance was seen when classifying severe dementia (AUROC 0.99).
CONCLUSIONS: A supervised machine learning algorithm exhibited excellent 
performance in identifying dementia stages based on dementia symptoms reported 
in an online environment. This novel dementia staging algorithm can be used to 
describe dementia stage based on user-reported symptoms. This type of symptom 
recording offers real-world data that reflect important symptoms in people with 
dementia.
256
The microbiota-gut-brain axis is a bidirectional communication system that is 
poorly understood. Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common cause of dementia, 
has long been associated with bacterial infections and inflammation-causing 
immunosenescence. Recent studies examining the intestinal microbiota of AD 
patients revealed that their microbiome differs from that of subjects without 
dementia. In this work, we prospectively enrolled 108 nursing home elders and 
followed each for up to 5 months, collecting longitudinal stool samples from 
which we performed metagenomic sequencing and in vitro T84 intestinal epithelial 
cell functional assays for P-glycoprotein (P-gp) expression, a critical mediator 
of intestinal homeostasis. Our analysis identified clinical parameters as well 
as numerous microbial taxa and functional genes that act as predictors of AD 
dementia in comparison to elders without dementia or with other dementia types. 
We further demonstrate that stool samples from elders with AD can induce lower 
P-gp expression levels in vitro those samples from elders without dementia or 
with other dementia types. We also paired functional studies with machine 
learning approaches to identify bacterial species differentiating the microbiome 
of AD elders from that of elders without dementia, which in turn are accurate 
predictors of the loss of dysregulation of the P-gp pathway. We observed that 
the microbiome of AD elders shows a lower proportion and prevalence of bacteria 
with the potential to synthesize butyrate, as well as higher abundances of taxa 
that are known to cause proinflammatory states. Therefore, a potential nexus 
between the intestinal microbiome and AD is the modulation of intestinal 
homeostasis by increases in inflammatory, and decreases in anti-inflammatory, 
microbial metabolism.IMPORTANCE Studies of the intestinal microbiome and AD have 
demonstrated associations with microbiome composition at the genus level among 
matched cohorts. We move this body of literature forward by more deeply 
investigating microbiome composition via metagenomics and by comparing AD 
patients against those without dementia and with other dementia types. We also 
exploit machine learning approaches that combine both metagenomic and clinical 
data. Finally, our functional studies using stool samples from elders 
demonstrate how the c microbiome of AD elders can affect intestinal health via 
dysregulation of the P-glycoprotein pathway. P-glycoprotein dysregulation 
contributes directly to inflammatory disorders of the intestine. Since AD has 
been long thought to be linked to chronic bacterial infections as a possible 
etiology, our findings therefore fill a gap in knowledge in the field of AD 
research by identifying a nexus between the microbiome, loss of intestinal 
homeostasis, and inflammation that may underlie this neurodegenerative disorder.
257
IMPORTANCE: Major life stressors, such as loss and trauma, increase the risk of 
depression. It is known that individuals show heterogeneous trajectories of 
depressive symptoms following major life stressors, including chronic 
depression, recovery, and resilience. Although common genetic variation has been 
associated with depression risk, genomic factors that could help discriminate 
trajectories of risk vs resilience following adversity have not been identified.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the discriminatory accuracy of a deep neural net combining 
joint information from 21 psychiatric and health-related multiple polygenic 
scores (PGSs) for discriminating resilience vs other longitudinal symptom 
trajectories with use of longitudinal, genetically informed data on adults 
exposed to major life stressors.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The Health and Retirement Study is a 
longitudinal panel cohort study in US citizens older than 50 years, with data 
being collected once every 2 years between 1992 and 2010. A total of 2071 
participants who were of European ancestry with available depressive symptom 
trajectory information after experiencing an index depressogenic major life 
stressor were included. Latent growth mixture modeling identified heterogeneous 
trajectories of depressive symptoms before and after major life stressors, 
including stable low symptoms (ie, resilience), as well as improving, emergent, 
and preexisting/chronic symptom patterns. Twenty-one PGSs were examined as 
factors distinctively associated with these heterogeneous trajectories. Local 
interpretable model-agnostic explanations were applied to examine PGSs 
associated with each trajectory. Data were analyzed using the DNN model from 
June to July 2020.
EXPOSURES: Development of depression and resilience were examined in older 
adults after a major life stressor, such as bereavement, divorce, and job loss, 
or major health events, such as myocardial infarction and cancer.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Discriminatory accuracy of a deep neural net model 
trained for the multinomial classification of 4 distinct trajectories of 
depressive symptoms (Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression scale) based on 
21 PGSs using supervised machine learning.
RESULTS: Of the 2071 participants, 1329 were women (64.2%); mean (SD) age was 
55.96 (8.52) years. Of these, 1638 (79.1%) were classified as resilient, 160 
(7.75) in recovery (improving), 159 (7.7%) with emerging depression, and 114 
(5.5%) with preexisting/chronic depression symptoms. Deep neural nets 
distinguished these 4 trajectories with high discriminatory accuracy (multiclass 
micro-average area under the curve, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.87-0.89; multiclass 
macro-average area under the curve, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.85-0.87). Discriminatory 
accuracy was highest for preexisting/chronic depression (AUC 0.93), followed by 
emerging depression (AUC 0.88), recovery (AUC 0.87), resilience (AUC 0.75).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The results of the longitudinal cohort study suggest 
that multivariate PGS profiles provide information to accurately distinguish 
between heterogeneous stress-related risk and resilience phenotypes.
258
OBJECTIVES: Emergency departments (EDs) are an important point of contact for 
people with opioid use disorder (OUD). Universal screening for OUD is costly and 
often infeasible. Evidence on effective, selective screening is needed. We 
assessed the feasibility of using a risk factor-based machine learning model to 
identify OUD quickly among patients presenting in EDs.
DESIGN/SETTINGS/PARTICIPANTS: In this cohort study, all ED visits between 
January 2016 and March 2018 for patients aged 12 years and older were identified 
from electronic health records (EHRs) data from a large university health 
system. First, logistic regression modelling was used to describe and elucidate 
the associations between patient demographic and clinical characteristics and 
diagnosis of OUD. Second, a Gradient Boosting Classifier was applied to develop 
a predictive model to identify patients at risk of OUD. The predictive 
performance of the Gradient Boosting algorithm was assessed using F1 scores and 
area under the curve (AUC).
OUTCOME: The primary outcome was the diagnosis of OUD.
RESULTS: Among 345 728 patient ED visits (mean (SD) patient age, 49.4 (21.0) 
years; 210 045 (60.8%) female), 1.16% had a diagnosis of OUD. Bivariate analyses 
indicated that history of OUD was the strongest predictor of current OUD 
(OR=13.4, CI: 11.8 to 15.1). When history of OUD was excluded in multivariate 
models, baseline use of medications for OUD (OR=3.4, CI: 2.9 to 4.0) and white 
race (OR=2.9, CI: 2.6 to 3.3) were the strongest predictors. The best Gradient 
Boosting model achieved an AUC of 0.71, accuracy of 0.96 but only 0.45 
sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients who present at the ED with OUD are high-need patients who 
are typically smokers with psychiatric, chronic pain and substance use 
disorders. A machine learning model did not improve predictive ability. A quick 
review of a patient's EHR for history of OUD is an efficient strategy to 
identify those who are currently at greatest risk of OUD.
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
259
Healthy brain dynamics can be understood as the emergence of a complex system 
far from thermodynamic equilibrium. Brain dynamics are temporally irreversible 
and thus establish a preferred direction in time (i.e., arrow of time). However, 
little is known about how the time-reversal symmetry of spontaneous brain 
activity is affected by Alzheimer's disease (AD). We hypothesized that the level 
of irreversibility would be compromised in AD, signaling a fundamental shift in 
the collective properties of brain activity toward equilibrium dynamics. We 
investigated the irreversibility from resting-state fMRI and EEG data in male 
and female human patients with AD and elderly healthy control subjects (HCs). We 
quantified the level of irreversibility and, thus, proximity to nonequilibrium 
dynamics by comparing forward and backward time series through time-shifted 
correlations. AD was associated with a breakdown of temporal irreversibility at 
the global, local, and network levels, and at multiple oscillatory frequency 
bands. At the local level, temporoparietal and frontal regions were affected by 
AD. The limbic, frontoparietal, default mode, and salience networks were the 
most compromised at the network level. The temporal reversibility was associated 
with cognitive decline in AD and gray matter volume in HCs. The irreversibility 
of brain dynamics provided higher accuracy and more distinctive information than 
classical neurocognitive measures when differentiating AD from control subjects. 
Findings were validated using an out-of-sample cohort. Present results offer new 
evidence regarding pathophysiological links between the entropy generation rate 
of brain dynamics and the clinical presentation of AD, opening new avenues for 
dementia characterization at different levels.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT By 
assessing the irreversibility of large-scale dynamics across multiple brain 
signals, we provide a precise signature capable of distinguishing Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) at the global, local, and network levels and different oscillatory 
regimes. Irreversibility of limbic, frontoparietal, default-mode, and salience 
networks was the most compromised by AD compared with more sensory-motor 
networks. Moreover, the time-irreversibility properties associated with 
cognitive decline and atrophy outperformed and complemented classical 
neurocognitive markers of AD in predictive classification performance. Findings 
were generalized and replicated with an out-of-sample validation procedure. We 
provide novel multilevel evidence of reduced irreversibility in AD brain 
dynamics that has the potential to open new avenues for understating 
neurodegeneration in terms of the temporal asymmetry of brain dynamics.
260
OBJECTIVE: A wealth of evidence has linked purpose in life (PiL) to better 
mental and physical health and healthy aging. Here, the authors aimed to 
determine important correlates of PiL using a machine learning approach.
METHODS: Participants were recruited from retirement communities by the Rush 
Memory and Aging Project and assessed for childhood experience, adulthood 
sociodemographic factors (e.g., education, income, marital status), lifestyle 
and health behavior (e.g., cognitively stimulating activities, exercise, social 
activities, social network size), psychological factors (e.g., depression, 
loneliness, perceived discrimination, perceived social support), personality 
traits (e.g., PiL, harm avoidance), and medical conditions. Elastic Net was 
implemented to identify important correlates of PiL.
RESULTS: A total of 1,839 participants were included in our analysis. Among the 
23 variables provided to Elastic Net, 10 were identified as important correlates 
of PiL. In order of decreasing effect size, factors associated with lower PiL 
were loneliness, harm avoidance, older age, and depressive symptoms, while those 
associated with greater PiL were perceived social support, more social 
activities, more years of education, higher income, intact late-life cognitive 
performance, and more middle-age cognitive activities.
CONCLUSION: Our findings identify potentially important modifiable factors as 
targets for intervention strategies to enhance PiL.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
261
OBJECTIVE: The growing pandemic of loneliness has great relevance to aging 
populations, though assessments are limited by self-report approaches. This 
paper explores the use of artificial intelligence (AI) technology to evaluate 
interviews on loneliness, notably, employing natural language processing (NLP) 
to quantify sentiment and features that indicate loneliness in transcribed 
speech text of older adults.
DESIGN: Participants completed semi-structured qualitative interviews regarding 
the experience of loneliness and a quantitative self-report scale (University of 
California Los Angeles or UCLA Loneliness scale) to assess loneliness. Lonely 
and non-lonely participants (based on qualitative and quantitative assessments) 
were compared.
SETTING: Independent living sector of a senior housing community in San Diego 
County.
PARTICIPANTS: Eighty English-speaking older adults with age range 66-94 (mean 83 
years).
MEASUREMENTS: Interviews were audiotaped and manually transcribed. Transcripts 
were examined using NLP approaches to quantify sentiment and expressed emotions.
RESULTS: Lonely individuals (by qualitative assessments) had longer responses 
with greater expression of sadness to direct questions about loneliness. Women 
were more likely to endorse feeling lonely during the qualitative interview. Men 
used more fearful and joyful words in their responses. Using linguistic 
features, machine learning models could predict qualitative loneliness with 94% 
precision (sensitivity = 0.90, specificity = 1.00) and quantitative loneliness 
with 76% precision (sensitivity = 0.57, specificity = 0.89).
CONCLUSIONS: AI (e.g., NLP and machine learning approaches) can provide unique 
insights into how linguistic features of transcribed speech data may reflect 
loneliness. Eventually linguistic features could be used to assess loneliness of 
individuals, despite limitations of commercially developed natural language 
understanding programs.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
262
Several imaging modalities, including T1-weighted structural imaging, diffusion 
tensor imaging, and functional MRI can show chronological age related changes. 
Employing machine learning algorithms, an individual's imaging data can predict 
their age with reasonable accuracy. While details vary according to modality, 
the general strategy is to: (1) extract image-related features, (2) build a 
model on a training set that uses those features to predict an individual's age, 
(3) validate the model on a test dataset, producing a predicted age for each 
individual, (4) define the "Brain Age Gap Estimate" (BrainAGE) as the difference 
between an individual's predicted age and his/her chronological age, (5) 
estimate the relationship between BrainAGE and other variables of interest, and 
(6) make inferences about those variables and accelerated or delayed brain 
aging. For example, a group of individuals with overall positive BrainAGE may 
show signs of accelerated aging in other variables as well. There is inevitably 
an overestimation of the age of younger individuals and an underestimation of 
the age of older individuals due to "regression to the mean." The correlation 
between chronological age and BrainAGE may significantly impact the relationship 
between BrainAGE and other variables of interest when they are also related to 
age. In this study, we examine the detectability of variable effects under 
different assumptions. We use empirical results from two separate datasets 
[training = 475 healthy volunteers, aged 18-60 years (259 female); testing = 489 
participants including people with mood/anxiety, substance use, eating disorders 
and healthy controls, aged 18-56 years (312 female)] to inform simulation 
parameter selection. Outcomes in simulated and empirical data strongly support 
the proposal that models incorporating BrainAGE should include chronological age 
as a covariate. We propose either including age as a covariate in step 5 of the 
above framework, or employing a multistep procedure where age is regressed on 
BrainAGE prior to step 5, producing BrainAGE Residualized (BrainAGER) scores.
263
INTRODUCTION: Alzheimer's disease is a degenerative brain disease and the most 
common cause of dementia. Today, 47 million people live with dementia worldwide. 
This number is projected to increase to more than 131 million by 2050, as 
populations age. Therefore, the World Health Organization considers serious 
cognitive deterioration a public health priority.
OBJECTIVES: Advanced cognitive evaluation mechanisms are needed to help make an 
early diagnosis. These new mechanisms should overcome the limitations of current 
neuropsychological tests, including delayed detection; being perceived as 
intrusive; being non-ecological; being dependent on confounding factors; or 
their administration being expensive, among others. A promising novel approach 
consists of the introduction of serious games based on virtual reality and 
machine learning able to assess cognitive traits relevant to the diagnosis of 
mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease.
METHODS: As a result of a preliminary pilot experiment, promising evidence was 
obtained about the predictive power of this solution. However, for these new 
serious games to be effective, evidence has to be gathered on the player 
experience by senior adults, avoiding the limitations of traditional tests at 
the same time. This study addresses these aspects with the participation of 74 
senior users and 15 test administrators.
RESULTS: Main findings confirm the usability and playability of Panoramix, a 
game battery designed according to the principles discussed above, its 
technological acceptability and its accessibility. For example, in relation to 
acceptability, the game battery was scored 4.39 in a 5-point scale, while its 
average usability score was 4.45 regardless of socio-cultural level or previous 
experience with digital technologies. In addition, health professionals confirm 
both, usability and playability, levels with an average score of 6.5 in a 
7-point scale. Participants' willingness of using this kind of systems for 
cognitive evaluation was also confirmed.
CONCLUSION: Promising results obtained pave the way for additional work to 
confirm the diagnostic validity according to clinical standards of these new 
cognitive assessment tools.
264
Human DNA methylation data have been used to develop biomarkers of ageing, 
referred to as 'epigenetic clocks', which have been widely used to identify 
differences between chronological age and biological age in health and disease 
including neurodegeneration, dementia and other brain phenotypes. Existing DNA 
methylation clocks have been shown to be highly accurate in blood but are less 
precise when used in older samples or in tissue types not included in training 
the model, including brain. We aimed to develop a novel epigenetic clock that 
performs optimally in human cortex tissue and has the potential to identify 
phenotypes associated with biological ageing in the brain. We generated an 
extensive dataset of human cortex DNA methylation data spanning the life course 
(n = 1397, ages = 1 to 108 years). This dataset was split into 'training' and 
'testing' samples (training: n = 1047; testing: n = 350). DNA methylation age 
estimators were derived using a transformed version of chronological age on DNA 
methylation at specific sites using elastic net regression, a supervised machine 
learning method. The cortical clock was subsequently validated in a novel 
independent human cortex dataset (n = 1221, ages = 41 to 104 years) and tested 
for specificity in a large whole blood dataset (n = 1175, ages = 28 to 98 
years). We identified a set of 347 DNA methylation sites that, in combination, 
optimally predict age in the human cortex. The sum of DNA methylation levels at 
these sites weighted by their regression coefficients provide the cortical DNA 
methylation clock age estimate. The novel clock dramatically outperformed 
previously reported clocks in additional cortical datasets. Our findings suggest 
that previous associations between predicted DNA methylation age and 
neurodegenerative phenotypes might represent false positives resulting from 
clocks not robustly calibrated to the tissue being tested and for phenotypes 
that become manifest in older ages. The age distribution and tissue type of 
samples included in training datasets need to be considered when building and 
applying epigenetic clock algorithms to human epidemiological or disease 
cohorts.
Guarantors of Brain.
265
OBJECTIVE: Recent evidence shows that indicators testing conventional olfactory 
function have a high degree of similarity to cognitive function tests and the 
potential to diagnose early-stage Alzheimer's disease (AD). In this study, the 
efficacy of functional near-infrared spectroscopy time-series data obtained 
through olfactory stimulation was investigated as an early diagnostic tool for 
mild cognitive impairment in AD using random forest, a machine learning 
algorithm.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a patient-level, single-group, diagnostic 
interventional trial using near-infrared signals measured during olfactory 
stimulation in the prefrontal cortex of 178 older adults ranging from normal to 
participants with AD as markers to discriminate AD stages. We first divided the 
participants into normal older adults, AD mild cognitive impairment, and AD 
groups using dementia diagnostic criteria such as the Mini-Mental State 
Examination and Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery. We compared the left 
and right oxygenation difference by calculating the relative oxygenation 
difference from the change in relative oxygen concentration.
RESULTS: A total of 168 participants met the eligibility criteria: 70 (41.6%) 
had normal cognitive function; 42 (25%) mild cognitive impairment; 21 (12.5%) 
mild AD; and 35 (20.8%) moderate AD. A random forest machine learning model was 
developed to predict the AD stage, with an area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve of 90.7% for mild cognitive impairment and AD, 90.99% for 
mild cognitive impairment, and 93.34% for AD only.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the classification of the oxygenation difference index of 
the left and right prefrontal cortices during olfactory stimulation through 
machine learning, we found that it was possible to detect early-stage mild 
cognitive impairment in AD. Our results highlight the potential for early AD 
diagnosis using near-infrared signals from the prefrontal cortex obtained upon 
olfactory stimulation. Moreover, the results showed high similarity to the 
existing cognitive function tests and high accuracy in AD stage classification.
266
BACKGROUND: The presence of subjective cognitive complaints (SCCs) is a core 
criterion for diagnosis of subjective cognitive decline (SCD); however, no 
standard procedure for distinguishing normative and non-normative SCCs has yet 
been established.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether differentiation of participants with SCD 
according to SCC severity improves the validity of the prediction of progression 
in SCD and MCI and to explore validity metrics for two extreme thresholds of the 
distribution in scores in a questionnaire on SCCs.
METHODS: Two hundred and fifty-three older adults with SCCs participating in the 
Compostela Aging Study (CompAS) were classified as MCI or SCD at baseline. The 
participants underwent two follow-up assessments and were classified as 
cognitively stable or worsened. Severity of SCCs (low and high) in SCD was 
established by using two different percentiles of the questionnaire score 
distribution as cut-off points. The validity of these cut-off points for 
predicting progression using socio-demographic, health, and neuropsychological 
variables was tested by machine learning (ML) analysis.
RESULTS: Severity of SCCs in SCD established considering the 5th percentile as a 
cut-off point proved to be the best metric for predicting progression. The 
variables with the main role in conforming the predictive algorithm were those 
related to memory, cognitive reserve, general health, and the stability of 
diagnosis over time.
CONCLUSION: Moderate to high complainers showed an increased probability of 
progression in cognitive decline, suggesting the clinical relevance of standard 
procedures to determine SCC severity. Our findings highlight the important role 
of the multimodal ML approach in predicting progression.
267
INTRODUCTION: Preventing dementia, or modifying disease course, requires 
identification of presymptomatic or minimally symptomatic high-risk individuals.
METHODS: We used longitudinal electronic health records from two large academic 
medical centers and applied a validated natural language processing tool to 
estimate cognitive symptomatology. We used survival analysis to examine the 
association of cognitive symptoms with incident dementia diagnosis during up to 
8 years of follow-up.
RESULTS: Among 267,855 hospitalized patients with 1,251,858 patient years of 
follow-up data, 6516 (2.4%) received a new diagnosis of dementia. In competing 
risk regression, an increasing cognitive symptom score was associated with 
earlier dementia diagnosis (HR 1.63; 1.54-1.72). Similar results were observed 
in the second hospital system and in subgroup analysis of younger and older 
patients.
DISCUSSION: A cognitive symptom measure identified in discharge notes 
facilitated stratification of risk for dementia up to 8 years before diagnosis.
268
BACKGROUND: According to Europe's Beating Cancer Plan, the number of cancer 
survivors is growing every year and is now estimated at over 12 million in 
Europe. A main objective of the European Commission is to ensure that cancer 
survivors can enjoy a high quality of life, underlining the role of digital 
technology and eHealth apps and tools to achieve this.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective of this study is the development of a 
user-centered artificial intelligence system to facilitate the input and 
integration of patient-related biopsychosocial data to improve posttreatment 
quality of life, well-being, and health outcomes and examine the feasibility of 
this digitally assisted workflow in a real-life setting in patients with 
colorectal cancer and acute myeloid leukemia.
METHODS: A total of 60 patients with colorectal cancer and 30 patients with 
acute myeloid leukemia will be recruited from 2 clinical centers: 
Universitätsmedizin der Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz (Mainz, Germany) 
and IRCCS Istituto Romagnolo per lo Studio dei Tumori "Dino Amadori" (IRST, 
Italy). Psychosocial data (eg, emotional distress, fatigue, quality of life, 
subjective well-being, sleep problems, and appetite loss) will be collected by 
questionnaires via a smartphone app, and physiological data (eg, heart rate, 
skin temperature, and movement through step count) will be collected by a 
customizable smart wrist-worn sensor device. Each patient will be assessed every 
2 weeks over their 3-month participation in the ONCORELIEF study. Inclusion 
criteria include patients with the diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia or 
colorectal cancer, adult patients aged 18 years and older, life expectancy 
greater than 12 months, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 
≤2, and patients who have a smartphone and agree to use it for the purpose of 
the study. Exclusion criteria include patients with a reduced cognitive function 
(such as dementia) or technological illiteracy and other known active malignant 
neoplastic diseases (patients with a medical history of treated neoplastic 
disease are included).
RESULTS: The pilot study started on September 1, 2022. As of January 2023, we 
enrolled 33 patients with colorectal cancer and 7 patients with acute myeloid 
leukemia. As of January 2023, we have not yet started the data analysis. We 
expect to get all data in June 2023 and expect the results to be published in 
the second semester of 2023.
CONCLUSIONS: Web-based and mobile apps use methods from mathematical decision 
support and artificial intelligence through a closed-loop workflow that connects 
health professionals and patients. The ONCORELIEF system has the potential of 
continuously identifying, collecting, and processing data from diverse patient 
dimensions to offer health care recommendations, support patients with cancer to 
address their unmet needs, and optimize survivorship care.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: German Clinical Trials Register (DRKS) 00027808; 
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/45475.
Venios, Paris Emmanouil Laras, Gabrielle Oestreicher, Markus Moehler, Margherita 
269
BACKGROUND: Neurocognitive disorders are often accompanied by behavioral 
symptoms such as anxiety, depression, and/or apathy. These symptoms can occur 
very early in the disease progression and are often difficult to detect and 
quantify in nonspecialized clinical settings.
OBJECTIVE: We focus in this study on apathy, one of the most common and 
debilitating neuropsychiatric symptoms in neurocognitive disorders. 
Specifically, we investigated whether facial expressivity extracted through 
computer vision software correlates with the severity of apathy symptoms in 
elderly subjects with neurocognitive disorders.
METHODS: A total of 63 subjects (38 females and 25 males) with neurocognitive 
disorder participated in the study. Apathy was assessed using the Apathy 
Inventory (AI), a scale comprising 3 domains of apathy: loss of interest, loss 
of initiation, and emotional blunting. The higher the scale score, the more 
severe the apathy symptoms. Participants were asked to recall a positive and a 
negative event of their life, while their voice and face were recorded using a 
tablet device. Action units (AUs), which are basic facial movements, were 
extracted using OpenFace 2.0. A total of 17 AUs (intensity and presence) for 
each frame of the video were extracted in both positive and negative 
storytelling. Average intensity and frequency of AU activation were calculated 
for each participant in each video. Partial correlations (controlling for the 
level of depression and cognitive impairment) were performed between these 
indexes and AI subscales.
RESULTS: Results showed that AU intensity and frequency were negatively 
correlated with apathy scale scores, in particular with the emotional blunting 
component. The more severe the apathy symptoms, the less expressivity in 
specific emotional and nonemotional AUs was displayed from participants while 
recalling an emotional event. Different AUs showed significant correlations 
depending on the sex of the participant and the task's valence (positive vs 
negative story), suggesting the importance of assessing male and female 
participants independently.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests the interest of employing computer vision-based 
facial analysis to quantify facial expressivity and assess the severity of 
apathy symptoms in subjects with neurocognitive disorders. This may represent a 
useful tool for a preliminary apathy assessment in nonspecialized settings and 
could be used to complement classical clinical scales. Future studies including 
larger samples should confirm the clinical relevance of this kind of instrument.
Roxane Fabre, Philippe Robert, Valeria Manera. Originally published in JMIR 
270
OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether an automatic retinal image analysis (ARIA) 
incorporating machine learning approach can identify asymptomatic older adults 
harboring high burden of white matter hyperintensities (WMH) using MRI as gold 
standard.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, we evaluated 180 community-dwelling, 
stroke-, and dementia-free healthy subjects and performed ARIA by acquiring a 
nonmydriatic retinal fundus image. The primary outcome was the diagnostic 
performance of ARIA in detecting significant WMH on MRI brain, defined as 
age-related white matter changes (ARWMC) grade ≥2. We analyzed both clinical 
variables and retinal characteristics using logistic regression analysis. We 
developed a machine learning network model with ARIA to estimate WMH and its 
classification.
RESULTS: All 180 subjects completed MRI and ARIA. The mean age was 
70.3 ± 4.5 years, 70 (39%) were male. Risk factor profiles were: 106 (59%) 
hypertension, 31 (17%) diabetes, and 47 (26%) hyperlipidemia. Severe WMH (global 
ARWMC grade ≥2) was found in 56 (31%) subjects. The performance for detecting 
severe WMH with sensitivity (SN) 0.929 (95% CI from 0.819 to 0.977) and 
specificity (SP) 0.984 (95% CI from 0.937 to 0.997) was excellent. There was a 
good correlation between WMH volume (log-transformed) obtained from MRI versus 
those estimated from retinal images using ARIA with a correlation coefficient of 
0.897 (95% CI from 0.864 to 0.922).
INTERPRETATION: We developed a robust algorithm to automatically evaluate 
retinal fundus image that can identify subjects with high WMH burden. Further 
community-based prospective studies should be performed for early screening of 
population at risk of cerebral small vessel disease.
271
Routine monitoring of lithium levels is common clinical practice. This is 
because the lithium prediction strategies available developed by previous 
studies are still limited due to insufficient prediction performance. Thus, we 
used machine learning approaches to predict lithium concentration in a large 
real-world dataset. Real-world data from multicenter electronic medical records 
were used in different machine learning algorithms to predict: (1) whether the 
serum level was 0.6-1.2 mmol/L or 0.0-0.6 mmol/L (binary prediction), and (2) 
its concentration value (continuous prediction). We developed models from 1505 
samples through 5-fold cross-validation and used 204 independent samples to test 
their performance by evaluating their accuracy. Moreover, we ranked the most 
important clinical features in different models and reconstructed three reduced 
models with fewer clinical features. For binary and continuous predictions, the 
average accuracy of these models was 0.70-0.73 and 0.68-0.75, respectively. 
Seven features were listed as important features related to serum lithium levels 
of 0.6-1.2 mmol/L or higher lithium concentration, namely older age, lower 
systolic blood pressure, higher daily and last doses of lithium prescription, 
concomitant psychotropic drugs with valproic acid and -pine drugs, and comorbid 
substance-related disorders. After reducing the features in the three new 
predictive models, the binary or continuous models still had an average accuracy 
of 0.67-0.74. Machine learning processes complex clinical data and provides a 
potential tool for predicting lithium concentration. This may help in clinical 
decision-making and reduce the frequency of serum level monitoring.
272
BACKGROUND: Depression is a common disorder that still remains underdiagnosed 
and undertreated in the UK National Health Service. Charities and voluntary 
organizations offer mental health services, but they are still struggling to 
promote these services to the individuals who need them. By analyzing social 
media (SM) content using machine learning techniques, it may be possible to 
identify which SM users are currently experiencing low mood, thus enabling the 
targeted advertising of mental health services to the individuals who would 
benefit from them.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to understand SM users' opinions of analysis of SM 
content for depression and targeted advertising on SM for mental health 
services.
METHODS: A Web-based, mixed methods, cross-sectional survey was administered to 
SM users aged 16 years or older within the United Kingdom. It asked participants 
about their demographics, their usage of SM, and their history of depression and 
presented structured and open-ended questions on views of SM content being 
analyzed for depression and views on receiving targeted advertising for mental 
health services.
RESULTS: A total of 183 participants completed the survey, and 114 (62.3%) of 
them had previously experienced depression. Participants indicated that they 
posted less during low moods, and they believed that their SM content would not 
reflect their depression. They could see the possible benefits of identifying 
depression from SM content but did not believe that the risks to privacy 
outweighed these benefits. A majority of the participants would not provide 
consent for such analysis to be conducted on their data and considered it to be 
intrusive and exposing.
CONCLUSIONS: In a climate of distrust of SM platforms' usage of personal data, 
participants in this survey did not perceive that the benefits of targeting 
advertisements for mental health services to individuals analyzed as having 
depression would outweigh the risks to privacy. Future work in this area should 
proceed with caution and should engage stakeholders at all stages to maximize 
the transparency and trustworthiness of such research endeavors.
published in JMIR Mental Health (http://mental.jmir.org), 13.11.2019.
273
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Problematic internet use (PIU; otherwise known as Internet 
Addiction) is a growing problem in modern societies. There is scarce knowledge 
of the demographic variables and specific internet activities associated with 
PIU and a limited understanding of how PIU should be conceptualized. Our aim was 
to identify specific internet activities associated with PIU and explore the 
moderating role of age and gender in those associations.
METHODS: We recruited 1749 participants aged 18 and above via media 
advertisements in an Internet-based survey at two sites, one in the US, and one 
in South Africa; we utilized Lasso regression for the analysis.
RESULTS: Specific internet activities were associated with higher problematic 
internet use scores, including general surfing (lasso β: 2.1), internet gaming 
(β: 0.6), online shopping (β: 1.4), use of online auction websites (β: 0.027), 
social networking (β: 0.46) and use of online pornography (β: 1.0). Age 
moderated the relationship between PIU and role-playing-games (β: 0.33), online 
gambling (β: 0.15), use of auction websites (β: 0.35) and streaming media (β: 
0.35), with older age associated with higher levels of PIU. There was 
inconclusive evidence for gender and gender × internet activities being 
associated with problematic internet use scores. Attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) and social anxiety disorder were associated with high PIU scores 
in young participants (age ≤ 25, β: 0.35 and 0.65 respectively), whereas 
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) were 
associated with high PIU scores in the older participants (age > 55, β: 6.4 and 
4.3 respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Many types of online behavior (e.g. shopping, pornography, general 
surfing) bear a stronger relationship with maladaptive use of the internet than 
gaming supporting the diagnostic classification of problematic internet use as a 
multifaceted disorder. Furthermore, internet activities and psychiatric 
diagnoses associated with problematic internet use vary with age, with public 
health implications.
274
OBJECTIVE: What is considered "abnormal" in clinical testing is typically 
defined by simple thresholds derived from normative data. For instance, when 
testing using the five-repetition sit-to-stand (5R-STS) test, the upper limit of 
normal (ULN) from a population of spine-healthy volunteers (10.5 seconds) is 
used to identify objective functional impairment (OFI), but this fails to 
consider different properties of individuals (e.g., taller and shorter, older 
and younger). Therefore, the authors developed a personalized testing strategy 
to quantify patient-specific OFI using machine learning.
METHODS: Patients with disc herniation, spinal stenosis, spondylolisthesis, or 
discogenic chronic low-back pain and a population of spine-healthy volunteers, 
from two prospective studies, were included. A machine learning model was 
trained on normative data to predict personalized "expected" test times and 
their confidence intervals and ULNs (99th percentiles) based on simple 
demographics. OFI was defined as a test time greater than the personalized ULN. 
OFI was categorized into types 1 to 3 based on a clustering algorithm. A web app 
was developed to deploy the model clinically.
RESULTS: Overall, 288 patients and 129 spine-healthy individuals were included. 
The model predicted "expected" test times with a mean absolute error of 1.18 
(95% CI 1.13-1.21) seconds and R2 of 0.37 (95% CI 0.34-0.41). Based on the 
implemented personalized testing strategy, 191 patients (66.3%) exhibited OFI. 
Type 1, 2, and 3 impairments were seen in 64 (33.5%), 91 (47.6%), and 36 (18.8%) 
patients, respectively. Increasing detected levels of OFI were associated with 
statistically significant increases in subjective functional impairment, extreme 
anxiety and depression symptoms, being bedridden, extreme pain or discomfort, 
inability to carry out activities of daily living, and a limited ability to 
work.
CONCLUSIONS: In the era of "precision medicine," simple population-based 
thresholds may eventually not be adequate to monitor quality and safety in 
neurosurgery. Individualized assessment integrating machine learning techniques 
provides more detailed and objective clinical assessment. The personalized 
testing strategy demonstrated concurrent validity with quality-of-life measures, 
enabled clinical application.
275
OBJECTIVE: In vivo functional changes in white matter during the progression of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) have not been previously reported. Our objectives are 
to measure changes in white matter functional connectivity (FC) in an elderly 
population undergoing cognitive decline as AD develops, to establish their 
relationship to neuropsychological scores of cognitive abilities, and to assess 
the performance in prediction of AD using white matter FC measures as features.
METHODS: Analyses were conducted using resting state functional MRI and 
neuropsychological data from 383 ADNI participants, including 136 cognitive 
normal (CN) controls, 46 with significant memory concern, 83 with early mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), 37 with MCI, 46 with late MCI, and 35 with AD 
dementia. FC metrics between segregated white matter tracts and discrete gray 
matter volumes or between white matter tracts were quantitatively analyzed and 
characterized, along with their relationships to 6 cognitive measures. Finally, 
supervised machine learning was implemented on white matter FCs to classify the 
participants and performance of the classification was evaluated.
RESULTS: Significant decreases in FC measures were found in white matter with 
prominent, specific, regional deficits appearing in late MCI and AD dementia 
patients from CN. These changes significantly correlated with neuropsychological 
measurements of impairments in cognition and memory. The sensitivity and 
specificity of distinguishing AD dementia and CN using white matter FCs were 
0.83 and 0.81 respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The white matter FC decreased in late MCI and AD 
dementia patients compared to CN participants, and this decrease was correlated 
with cognitive measures. White matter FC is valuable in the prediction of AD. 
All these findings suggest that white matter FC may be a promising avenue for 
understanding functional impairments in white matter tracts during AD 
progression.
276
Purpose: The early detection of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is essential in 
aging societies where dementia is becoming a common manifestation among the 
elderly. Thus our aim is to develop a decision tree to discriminate individuals 
at risk of MCI among non-institutionalized elderly users of community pharmacy. 
A more clinically and patient-oriented role of the community pharmacist in 
primary care makes the dispensation of medication an adequate situation for an 
effective, rapid, easy, and reproducible screening of MCI. Methods: A 
cross-sectional study was conducted with 728 non-institutionalized participants 
older than 65. A total of 167 variables were collected such as age, gender, 
educational attainment, daily sleep duration, reading frequency, subjective 
memory complaint, and medication. Two screening tests were used to detect 
possible MCI: Short Portable Mental State Questionnaire (SPMSQ) and the 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Participants classified as positive were 
referred to clinical diagnosis. A decision tree and predictive models are 
presented as a result of applying techniques of machine learning for a more 
efficient enrollment. Results: One hundred and twenty-eight participants (17.4%) 
scored positive on MCI tests. A recursive partitioning algorithm with the most 
significant variables determined that the most relevant for the decision tree 
are: female sex, sleeping more than 9 h daily, age higher than 79 years as risk 
factors, and reading frequency. Moreover, psychoanaleptics, nootropics, and 
antidepressants, and anti-inflammatory drugs achieve a high score of importance 
according to the predictive algorithms. Furthermore, results obtained from these 
algorithms agree with the current research on MCI. Conclusion: Lifestyle-related 
factors such as sleep duration and the lack of reading habits are associated 
with the presence of positive in MCI test. Moreover, we have depicted how 
machine learning provides a sound methodology to produce tools for early 
detection of MCI in community pharmacy. Impact of findings on practice: The 
community of pharmacists provided with adequate tools could develop a crucial 
task in the early detection of MCI to redirect them immediately to the 
specialists in neurology or psychiatry. Pharmacists are one of the most 
accessible and regularly visited health care professionals and they can play a 
vital role in early detection of MCI.
277
PURPOSE: To date, the assessment of disability in older people is obtained 
utilizing a Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA). However, it is often 
difficult to understand which areas of CGA are most predictive of the 
disability. The aim of this study is to evaluate the possibility to early 
predict-1 year ahead-the disability level of a patient using machine leaning 
models.
METHODS: Community-dwelling older people were enrolled in this study. CGA was 
made at baseline and at 1 year follow-up. After collecting input/independent 
variables (i.e., age, gender, schooling followed, body mass index, information 
on smoking, polypharmacy, functional status, cognitive performance, depression, 
nutritional status), we performed two distinct Support Vector Machine models 
(SVMs) able to predict functional status 1 year ahead. To validate the choice of 
the model, the results achieved with the SVMs were compared with the output 
produced by simple linear regression models.
RESULTS: 218 patients (mean age = 78.01; SD = 7.85; male = 39%) were recruited. 
The combination of the two SVMs is able to achieve a higher prediction accuracy 
(exceeding 80% instances correctly classified vs 67% instances correctly 
classified by the combination of the two linear regression models). Furthermore, 
SVMs are able to classify both the three categories, self sufficiently, 
disability risk and disability, while linear regression model separates the 
population only in two groups (self-sufficiency and disability) without 
identifying the intermediate category (disability risk) which turns out to be 
the most critical one.
CONCLUSIONS: The development of such a model can contribute to the early 
detection of patients at risk of self-sufficiency loss.
278
OBJECTIVES: Diagnosis of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) requires lengthy 
diagnostic procedures, typically available at tertiary Health Care Centers 
(HCC). This prospective study evaluated a flexible Machine Learning (ML) 
framework toward identifying persons with MCI or dementia based on information 
that can be readily available in a primary HC setting.
METHODS: Demographic and clinical data, informant ratings of recent behavioral 
changes, self-reported anxiety and depression symptoms, subjective cognitive 
complaints, and Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were pooled from two 
aging cohorts from the island of Crete, Greece (N = 763 aged 60-93 years) 
comprising persons diagnosed with MCI (n = 277) or dementia (n = 153), and 
cognitively non-impaired persons (CNI, n = 333). A Balanced Random Forest 
Classifier was used for classification and variable importance-based feature 
selection in nested cross-validation schemes (CNI vs MCI, CNI vs Dementia, MCI 
vs Dementia). Global-level model-agnostic analyses identified predictors 
displaying nonlinear behavior. Local level agnostic analyses pinpointed key 
predictor variables for a given classification result after statistically 
controlling for all other predictors in the model.
RESULTS: Classification of MCI vs CNI was achieved with improved sensitivity 
(74 %) and comparable specificity (73 %) compared to MMSE alone (37.2 % and 
94.3 %, respectively). Additional high-ranking features included age, education, 
behavioral changes, multicomorbidity and polypharmacy. Higher classification 
accuracy was achieved for MCI vs Dementia (sensitivity/specificity = 87 %) and 
CNI vs Dementia (sensitivity/specificity = 94 %) using the same set of 
variables. Model agnostic analyses revealed notable individual variability in 
the contribution of specific variables toward a given classification result.
CONCLUSIONS: Improved capacity to identify elderly with MCI can be achieved by 
combining demographic and medical information readily available at the PHC 
setting with MMSE scores, and informant ratings of behavioral changes. 
Explainability at the patient level may help clinicians identify specific 
predictor variables and patient scores to a given prediction outcome toward 
personalized risk assessment.
279
There is mounting evidence that ischemic cerebral infarction contributes to 
vascular cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly. Ischemic stroke and 
glioma are two majorly fatal diseases worldwide, which promote each other's 
development based on some common underlying mechanisms. As a 
post-transcriptional regulatory protein, RNA-binding protein is important in the 
development of a tumor and ischemic stroke (IS). The purpose of this study was 
to search for a group of RNA-binding protein (RBP) gene markers related to the 
prognosis of glioma and the occurrence of IS, and elucidate their underlying 
mechanisms in glioma and IS. First, a 6-RBP (POLR2F, DYNC1H1, SMAD9, TRIM21, 
BRCA1, and ERI1) gene signature (RBPS) showing an independent overall survival 
prognostic prediction was identified using the transcriptome data from 
TCGA-glioma cohort (n = 677); following which, it was independently verified in 
the CGGA-glioma cohort (n = 970). A nomogram, including RBPS, 1p19q codeletion, 
radiotherapy, chemotherapy, grade, and age, was established to predict the 
overall survival of patients with glioma, convenient for further clinical 
transformation. In addition, an automatic machine learning classification model 
based on radiomics features from MRI was developed to stratify according to the 
RBPS risk. The RBPS was associated with immunosuppression, energy metabolism, 
and tumor growth of gliomas. Subsequently, the six RBP genes from blood samples 
showed good classification performance for IS diagnosis (AUC = 0.95, 95% CI: 
0.902-0.997). The RBPS was associated with hypoxic responses, angiogenesis, and 
increased coagulation in IS. Upregulation of SMAD9 was associated with dementia, 
while downregulation of POLR2F was associated with aging-related hypoxic stress. 
Irf5/Trim21 in microglia and Taf7/Trim21 in pericytes from the mouse cerebral 
cortex were identified as RBPS-related molecules in each cell type under hypoxic 
conditions. The RBPS is expected to serve as a novel biomarker for studying the 
common mechanisms underlying glioma and IS.
280
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder 
affecting a large percentage of the adult population. A series of ongoing 
efforts has led to the development of a hybrid AI algorithm (a combination of a 
machine learning model and a knowledge-based model) for assisting adult ADHD 
diagnosis, and its clinical trial currently operating in the largest National 
Health Service (NHS) for adults with ADHD in the UK. Most recently, more data 
was made available that has lead to a total collection of 501 anonymized records 
as of 2022 July. This prompted the ongoing research to carefully examine the 
model by retraining and optimizing the machine learning algorithm in order to 
update the model with better generalization capability. Based on the large data 
collection so far, this paper also pilots a study to examine the effectiveness 
of variables other than the Diagnostic Interview for ADHD in adults (DIVA) 
assessment, which adds considerable cost in the screenining process as it relies 
on specially trained senior clinicians. Results reported in this paper 
demonstrate that the newly trained machine learning model reaches an accuracy of 
75.03% when all features are used; the hybrid model obtains an accuracy of 
93.61%. Exceeding what clinical experts expected in the absence of DIVA, 
achieving an accuracy of 65.27% using a rule-based machine learning model alone 
encourages the development of a cost effective model in the future.
281
OBJECTIVE: Neuropsychologists widely use the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure test 
(RCFT) as part of neuropsychological test batteries to evaluate cognitive 
function and assess constructional ability, with age being the most significant 
factor. Our study investigated a supervised machine learning (ML) algorithm to 
predict brain age gap using RCFT drawings from the healthy elderly community for 
early dementia detection.
PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: RCFT drawings from 1,970 healthy subjects (ages 
45-90 years) were collected from the Korean elderly community. We recorded 
subject demographic information including: age, gender, and education level. We 
trained the ML model with RCFT copies, immediate recall, delayed recall, and 
education level of the healthy subjects using CNN regression algorithm from 
RESULTS: The performance was evaluated by the mean absolute error (MAE) and root 
mean squared error (RMSE) between the predicted age and the chronological age 
based on a test dataset of 300 healthy subjects. The CNN regression model 
achieved an MAE of 7.2 years in predicting the brain age gap of the subjects, 
with an RMSE of 8.9 years.
CONCLUSION: The MAE and RMSE accuracies of the CNN regression model predicting 
the brain age gap showed the model could be a potential biomarker for individual 
brain aging and a cost-effective method for early dementia detection.
282
BACKGROUND: Silent brain infarction (SBI) is defined as the presence of 1 or 
more brain lesions, presumed to be because of vascular occlusion, found by 
neuroimaging (magnetic resonance imaging or computed tomography) in patients 
without clinical manifestations of stroke. It is more common than stroke and can 
be detected in 20% of healthy elderly people. Early detection of SBI may 
mitigate the risk of stroke by offering preventative treatment plans. Natural 
language processing (NLP) techniques offer an opportunity to systematically 
identify SBI cases from electronic health records (EHRs) by extracting, 
normalizing, and classifying SBI-related incidental findings interpreted by 
radiologists from neuroimaging reports.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to develop NLP systems to determine individuals with 
incidentally discovered SBIs from neuroimaging reports at 2 sites: Mayo Clinic 
and Tufts Medical Center.
METHODS: Both rule-based and machine learning approaches were adopted in 
developing the NLP system. The rule-based system was implemented using the open 
source NLP pipeline MedTagger, developed by Mayo Clinic. Features for rule-based 
systems, including significant words and patterns related to SBI, were generated 
using pointwise mutual information. The machine learning models adopted 
convolutional neural network (CNN), random forest, support vector machine, and 
logistic regression. The performance of the NLP algorithm was compared with a 
manually created gold standard. The gold standard dataset includes 1000 
radiology reports randomly retrieved from the 2 study sites (Mayo and Tufts) 
corresponding to patients with no prior or current diagnosis of stroke or 
dementia. 400 out of the 1000 reports were randomly sampled and double read to 
determine interannotator agreements. The gold standard dataset was equally split 
to 3 subsets for training, developing, and testing.
RESULTS: Among the 400 reports selected to determine interannotator agreement, 5 
reports were removed due to invalid scan types. The interannotator agreements 
across Mayo and Tufts neuroimaging reports were 0.87 and 0.91, respectively. The 
rule-based system yielded the best performance of predicting SBI with an 
accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and 
negative predictive value (NPV) of 0.991, 0.925, 1.000, 1.000, and 0.990, 
respectively. The CNN achieved the best score on predicting white matter disease 
(WMD) with an accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV of 0.994, 0.994, 
0.994, 0.994, and 0.994, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: We adopted a standardized data abstraction and modeling process to 
developed NLP techniques (rule-based and machine learning) to detect incidental 
SBIs and WMDs from annotated neuroimaging reports. Validation statistics 
suggested a high feasibility of detecting SBIs and WMDs from EHRs using NLP.
Kristin A Kinsman, Kristoff B Nelson, Michael S Clark, Patrick H Luetmer, Paul R 
283
OBJECTIVE: We compared the importance of socio-demographic, lifestyle, health, 
and multiple cognitive measures for predicting individual differences in 
depressive symptoms in later adulthood.
METHOD: Data came from 6203 community-dwelling older adults (age 41-93 years at 
study entry) from the United Kingdom. Predictors (36 in total) were assessed up 
to four times across a period of approximately 12 years. Depressive symptoms 
were measured with the Geriatric Depression Scale. Statistical methods included 
multiple imputation (for missing data), random forest analysis (a machine 
learning approach), and multivariate regression.
RESULTS: On average, depressive symptoms increased gradually following middle 
age and appeared to accelerate in later life. Individual differences in 
depressive symptoms were most strongly associated with differences in combined 
symptoms of physical illness (positive relation) and fluid intelligence 
(negative relation). The strength of association between depressive symptoms and 
fluid intelligence was unaffected by differences in health status within a 
subsample of chronically depressed individuals.
CONCLUSION: Joint consideration of general health status and fluid intelligence 
may facilitate prediction of depressive symptoms severity during later life and 
may also serve to identify sub-populations of community-dwelling elders at risk 
for chronic depression.
284
Much of the current data on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are derived 
from biopsy-based studies that may introduce ascertainment and selection bias. 
Selection of patients for liver biopsy has implications for clinical practice 
and the reported epidemiology of NAFLD. The aim of this study was to determine 
patient factors predictive of histologic versus empiric clinical diagnosis of 
NAFLD in real-world practice. Adults from TARGET-NASH were included in this 
study. Descriptive statistics are provided for the cohort and compare the 
characteristics of histologic NAFLD versus patients with clinically diagnosed 
NAFLD, followed by logistic regression and machine-learning models to describe 
predictors of liver biopsy. The records of 3,474 subjects were analyzed; median 
age was 59 years, 59% were female, 75% were White, and median body mass index 
was 32 kg/m2. Using histologic and/or clinical criteria, a diagnosis of 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis was made in 37%, and cirrhosis in 33%. Comorbid 
conditions included cardiovascular disease (19%), mental health diagnoses (49%), 
and osteoarthritis (10%). Predictors of a biopsy diagnosis included White race, 
female sex, diabetes, and elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT). ALT increased 
the odds of liver biopsy by 14% per 10-point rise. Machine-learning analyses 
showed non-White patients with ALT <69 had only a 0.06 probability of undergoing 
liver biopsy. ALT was the dominant variable that determined liver biopsy. 
Conclusions: In this real-world cohort of patients with NAFLD, two-thirds of 
patients did not have a liver biopsy. These patients were more likely to be 
non-White, older, with a normal ALT, showing potential gaps in or knowledge 
about this population.
on behalf of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.
285
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease causing 
dementia and poses significant health risks to middle-aged and elderly people. 
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most widely used diagnostic method 
for AD. However, it is challenging to collect sufficient brain imaging data with 
high-quality annotations. Weakly supervised learning (WSL) is a machine learning 
technique aimed at learning effective feature representation from limited or 
low-quality annotations. In this paper, we propose a WSL-based deep learning 
(DL) framework (ADGNET) consisting of a backbone network with an attention 
mechanism and a task network for simultaneous image classification and image 
reconstruction to identify and classify AD using limited annotations. The ADGNET 
achieves excellent performance based on six evaluation metrics (Kappa, 
sensitivity, specificity, precision, accuracy, F1-score) on two brain MRI 
datasets (2D MRI and 3D MRI data) using fine-tuning with only 20% of the labels 
from both datasets. The ADGNET has an F1-score of 99.61% and sensitivity is 
99.69%, outperforming two state-of-the-art models (ResNext WSL and SimCLR). The 
proposed method represents a potential WSL-based computer-aided diagnosis method 
for AD in clinical practice.
286
The recently described biological framework of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
emphasizes three types of pathology to characterize this disorder, referred to 
as the 'amyloid/tau/neurodegeneration' (A-T-N) status. The 'neurodegenerative' 
component is typically defined by atrophy measures derived from structural 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) such as hippocampal volume. Neurodegeneration 
measures from imaging are associated with disease symptoms and prognosis. Thus, 
sensitive image-based quantification of neurodegeneration in AD has an important 
role in a range of clinical and research operations. Although hippocampal volume 
is a sensitive metric of neurodegeneration, this measure is impacted by several 
clinical conditions other than AD and therefore lacks specificity. In contrast, 
selective regional cortical atrophy, known as the 'cortical signature of AD' 
provides greater specificity to AD pathology. Although atrophy is apparent even 
in the preclinical stages of the disease, it is possible that increased 
sensitivity to degeneration could be achieved by including tissue 
microstructural properties in the neurodegeneration measure. However, to 
facilitate clinical feasibility, such information should be obtainable from a 
single, short, noninvasive imaging protocol. We propose a multiscale MRI 
procedure that advances prior work through the quantification of features at 
both macrostructural (morphometry) and microstructural (tissue properties 
obtained from multiple layers of cortex and subcortical white matter) scales 
from a single structural brain image (referred to as 'multi-scale structural 
mapping'; MSSM). Vertex-wise partial least squares (PLS) regression was used to 
compress these multi-scale structural features. When contrasting patients with 
AD to cognitively intact matched older adults, the MSSM procedure showed 
substantially broader regional group differences including areas that were not 
statistically significant when using cortical thickness alone. Further, with 
multiple machine learning algorithms and ensemble procedures, we found that MSSM 
provides accurate detection of individuals with AD dementia (AUROC = 0.962, 
AUPRC = 0.976) and individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) that 
subsequently progressed to AD dementia (AUROC = 0.908, AUPRC = 0.910). The 
findings demonstrate the critical advancement of neurodegeneration 
quantification provided through multiscale mapping. Future work will determine 
the sensitivity of this technique for accurately detecting individuals with 
earlier impairment and biomarker positivity in the absence of impairment.
287
Bilingualism has been identified as a potential cognitive factor linked to 
delayed onset of dementia as well as boosting executive functions in healthy 
individuals. However, more recently, this claim has been called into question 
following several failed replications. It remains unclear whether these 
contradictory findings reflect how bilingualism is defined between studies, or 
methodological limitations when measuring the bilingual effect. One key issue is 
that despite the claims that bilingualism yields general protection to cognitive 
processes (i.e., the cognitive reserve hypothesis), studies reporting putative 
bilingual differences are often focused on domain specific experimental 
paradigms. This study chose a broader approach, by considering the consequences 
of bilingualism on a wide range of cognitive functions within individuals. We 
utilised 19 measures of different cognitive functions commonly associated with 
bilingual effects, to form a "cognitive profile" for 215 non-clinical 
participants. We recruited Welsh speakers, who as a group of bilinguals were 
highly homogeneous, as means of isolating the bilingualism criterion. We sought 
to determine if such analyses would independently classify bilingual/monolingual 
participant groups based on emergent patterns driven by collected cognitive 
profiles, such that population differences would emerge. Multiple predictive 
models were trained to independently recognise the cognitive profiles of 
bilinguals, older adults (60-90 years of age) and higher education attainment. 
Despite managing to successfully classify cognitive profiles based on age and 
education, the model failed to differentiate between bilingual and monolingual 
cognitive ability at a rate greater than that of chance. Repeated modelling 
using alternative definitions of bilingualism, and just the older adults, 
yielded similar results. In all cases then, using our "bottom-up" analytical 
approach, there was no evidence that bilingualism as a variable indicated 
differential cognitive performance - as a consequence, we conclude that 
bilinguals are not cognitively different from their monolingual counterparts, 
even in older demographics. We suggest that studies that have reported a 
bilingual advantage (typically recruiting immigrant populations) could well have 
confounded other key variables that may be driving reported advantages. We 
recommend that future research refine the machine learning methods used in this 
study to further investigate the complex relationship between bilingualism and 
cognition.
288
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore the causal effects of physical disability 
and number of comorbid chronic diseases on depressive symptoms in an elderly 
Chinese population.
DESIGN, SETTING AND ANALYSIS: Cross-sectional, baseline data were obtained from 
the China Longitudinal Ageing Social Survey, a stratified, multistage, 
probabilistic sampling survey conducted in 2014 that covers 28 of 31 provincial 
areas in China. The causal effects of physical disability and number of comorbid 
chronic diseases on depressive symptoms were analysed using the conditional 
average treatment effect method of machine learning. The causal effects model's 
adjustment was made for age, gender, residence, marital status, educational 
level, ethnicity, wealth quantile and other factors.
OUTCOME: Assessment of the causal effects of physical disability and number of 
comorbid chronic diseases on depressive symptoms.
PARTICIPANTS: 7496 subjects who were 60 years of age or older and who answered 
the questions on depressive symptoms and other independent variables of interest 
in a survey conducted in 2014 were included in this study.
RESULTS: Physical disability and number of comorbid chronic diseases had causal 
effects on depressive symptoms. Among the subjects who had one or more 
functional limitations, the probability of depressive symptoms increased by 22% 
(95% CI 19% to 24%). For the subjects who had one chronic disease and those who 
had two or more chronic diseases, the possibility of depressive symptoms 
increased by 13% (95% CI 10% to 15%) and 20% (95% CI 18% to 22%), respectively.
CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence that the presence of one or more 
functional limitations affects the occurrence of depressive symptoms among 
elderly people. The findings of our study are of value in developing programmes 
that are designed to identify elderly individuals who have physical disabilities 
or comorbid chronic diseases to provide early intervention.
by BMJ.
289
Depression associated with structural brain abnormalities is hypothesized to be 
related with accelerated brain aging. However, there is far from a unified 
conclusion because of clinical variations such as medication status, cumulative 
illness burden. To explore whether brain age is accelerated in never-treated 
first-episode patients with depression and its association with clinical 
characteristics, we constructed a prediction model where gray matter volumes 
measured by voxel-based morphometry derived from T1-weighted MRI scans were 
treated as features. The prediction model was first validated using healthy 
controls (HCs) in two Chinese Han datasets (Dataset 1, N = 130 for HCs and 
N = 195 for patients with depression; Dataset 2, N = 270 for HCs) separately or 
jointly, then the trained prediction model using HCs (N = 400) was applied to 
never-treated first-episode patients with depression (N = 195). The 
brain-predicted age difference (brain-PAD) scores defined as the difference 
between predicted brain age and chronological age, were calculated for all 
participants and compared between patients with age-, gender-, educational 
level-matched HCs in Dataset 1. Overall, patients presented higher brain-PAD 
scores suggesting patients with depression having an "older" brain than 
expected. More specially, this difference occurred at illness onset (illness 
duration <3 months) and following 2 years then disappeared as the illness 
further advanced (>2 years) in patients. This phenomenon was verified by another 
data-driven method and significant correlation between brain-PAD scores and 
illness duration in patients. Our results reveal that accelerated brain aging 
occurs at illness onset and suggest it is a stage-dependent phenomenon in 
depression.
290
Self-neglect is an inability or refusal to meet one's own basic needs as 
accepted by societal norms and is the most common report received by state 
agencies charged with investigating abuse, neglect and exploitation of 
vulnerable adults. Self-neglect is often seen in addition to one or multiple 
conditions of frailty, mild to severe dementia, poor sleep and depression. While 
awareness of elder self-neglect as a public health condition and intervention 
has significantly risen in the past decade as evidenced by the increasing amount 
of literature available, research on self-neglect still lacks comprehensiveness 
and clarity since its inception to the medical literature in the late 1960s. 
With the burgeoning of the older adult population, commonness of self-neglect 
will most likely increase as the current incidence rate represents only the "tip 
of the iceberg" theory given that most cases are unreported. The COVID-19 
pandemic has exacerbated the incidence of self-neglect in aged populations and 
the need for the use of intervention tools for aging adults and geriatric 
patients living alone, many of which may include in-home artificial intelligence 
systems. Despite this, little research has been conducted on aspects of 
self-neglect other than definition and identification. Substantial further study 
of this disorder's etiology, educating society on early detection, and 
conceivably preventing this syndrome altogether or at least halting progression 
and abating its severity is needed. The purpose of this research is to provide a 
definition of severe self-neglect, identify key concepts related to 
self-neglect, comprehensively describe this syndrome, present a conceptual 
framework and analyze the model for its usefulness, generalizability, parsimony, 
and testability.
291
In older adults without dementia, White Matter Hyperintensities (WMH) in MRI 
have been shown to be highly associated with cerebral amyloid deposition, 
measured by the Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) PET. However, the relation to age, 
sex, and education in explaining this association is not well understood. We use 
the voxel counts of regional WMH, age, one-hot encoded sex, and education to 
predict the regional PiB using a multilayer perceptron with only rectilinear 
activations using mean squared error. We then develop a novel, robust metric to 
understand the relevance of each input variable for prediction. Our observations 
indicate that sex is the most relevant predictor of PiB and that WMH is not 
relevant for prediction. These results indicate that there is a sex-specific 
risk architecture for Aβ deposition.
292
BACKGROUND: Minorities, including mainland Puerto Ricans, are impacted 
disproportionally by Alzheimer's disease (AD), dementia, and cognitive decline. 
Studying blood metabolomics in this population has the potential to probe the 
biological underpinnings of this health disparity.
OBJECTIVE: We performed a comprehensive analysis of circulating plasma 
metabolites in relation to cognitive function in 736 participants from the 
Boston Puerto Rican Health Study (BPRHS) who underwent untargeted 
mass-spectrometry based metabolomics analysis and had undergone a battery of 
in-person cognitive testing at baseline.
METHODS: After relevant exclusions, 621 metabolites were examined. We used 
multivariable regression, adjusted for age, sex, education, apolipoprotein E 
genotype, smoking, and Mediterranean dietary pattern, to identify metabolites 
related to global cognitive function in our cohort. LASSO machine learning was 
used in a complementary analysis to identify metabolites that could discriminate 
good from poor extremes of cognition. We also conducted sensitivity analyses: 
restricted to participants without diabetes, and to participants with good 
adherence to Mediterranean diet.
RESULTS: Of 621 metabolites, FDR corrected (p < 0.05) multivariable linear 
regression identified 3 metabolites positively, and 10 negatively, associated 
with cognitive function in the BPRHS. In a combination of FDR-corrected linear 
regression, logistic regression regularized via LASSO, and sensitivity analyses 
restricted to participants without diabetes, and with good adherence to the 
Mediterranean diet, β-cryptoxanthin plasma concentration was consistently 
associated with better cognitive function and N-acetylisoleucine and tyramine 
O-sulfate concentrations were consistently associated with worse cognitive 
function.
CONCLUSION: This untargeted metabolomics study identified potential biomarkers 
for cognitive function in a cohort of Puerto Rican older adults.
293
BACKGROUND: Most psychiatric disorders emerge in the second decade of life. In 
the present study, we examined whether environmental adversity, developmental 
antecedents, major depressive disorder, and functional impairment correlate with 
deviation from normative brain development in adolescence.
METHODS: We trained a brain age prediction model using 189 structural magnetic 
resonance imaging brain features in 1299 typically developing adolescents (age 
range 9-19 years, mean = 13.5, SD = 3.04), validated the model in a holdout set 
of 322 adolescents (mean = 13.5, SD = 3.07), and used it to predict age in an 
independent risk-enriched cohort of 150 adolescents (mean = 13.6, SD = 2.82). We 
tested associations between the brain age gap and adversity, early antecedents, 
depression, and functional impairment.
RESULTS: We accurately predicted chronological age in typically developing 
adolescents (mean absolute error = 1.53 years). The model generalized to the 
validation set (mean absolute error = 1.55 years, 1.98 bias adjusted) and to the 
independent at-risk sample (mean absolute error = 1.49 years, 1.86 bias 
adjusted). The brain age estimate was reliable in repeated scans (intraclass 
correlation = 0.94). Experience of environmental adversity (β = 0.18; 95% CI, 
0.04 to 0.31; p = .02), diagnosis of major depressive disorder (β = 0.61; 95% 
CI, 0.23 to 0.99; p = .01), and functional impairment (β = 0.16; 95% CI, 0.05 to 
0.27; p = .01) were associated with a positive brain age gap.
CONCLUSIONS: Risk factors, diagnosis, and impact of mental illness are 
associated with an older-appearing brain during development.
294
BACKGROUND: Researchers have not studied or used novel methods for identifying 
potential disparities for sexual minorities, those with criminal pasts, and 
veterans in (DOT).
METHODS: We used Bayesian logistic regression to identify factors associated 
with DOT, tested interaction effects, and used machine learning to classify 
qualitative responses.
FINDINGS: With 2,772 clients from two inpatient clinics in the Southwest United 
States, we found sexual minorities and females had 52% and 61%, increases and 
African Americans had 54% decreases in the odds of DOT. Additionally, those with 
a criminal past and 34.5 and older were less likely to DOT by 5% relative to 
clients with no prior involvement in the criminal justice system.
CONCLUSIONS: This study illustrated the disparities for women and sexual 
minorities in DOT as well as demonstrated novel methodological approaches to 
addressing previously unanswered questions.
295
PURPOSE: Suicide is an important health and social concern worldwide. Both 
suicidal ideation and suicide rates are higher in the elderly population than in 
other age groups; thus, more careful attention and targeted interventions are 
required. Therefore, we have developed a model to predict suicidal ideation in 
the community-dwelling elderly aged of >55 years.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A random forest algorithm was applied to those who 
participated in the Korea Welfare Panel. We used a total of 26 variables as 
potential predictors. To resolve the imbalance in the dataset resulting from the 
low frequency of suicidal ideation, training was performed by applying the 
synthetic minority oversampling technique. The performance index was calculated 
by applying the predictive model to the test set, which was not included in the 
training process.
RESULTS: A total of 6410 elderly Korean aged of >55 (mean, 71.48; standard 
deviation, 9.56) years were included in the analysis, of which 2.7% had suicidal 
ideation. The results for predicting suicidal ideation using the 26 chosen 
variables showed an AUC of 0.879, accuracy of 0.871, sensitivity of 0.750, and 
specificity of 0.874. The most significant variable in the predictive model was 
the severity of depression, followed by life satisfaction and self-esteem 
factors. Basic demographic variables such as age and gender demonstrated a 
relatively small effect.
CONCLUSION: Machine learning can be used to create algorithms for predicting 
suicidal ideation in community-dwelling elderly. However, there are limitations 
to predicting future suicidal ideation. A predictive model that includes both 
biological and cognitive indicators should be created in the future.
296
Existing predictive models of opioid use disorder (OUD) may change as the rate 
of opioid prescribing decreases. Using Veterans Administration's EHR data, we 
developed machine-learning predictive models of new OUD diagnoses and ranked the 
importance of patient features based on their ability to predict a new OUD 
diagnosis in 2000-2012 and 2013-2021. Using patient characteristics, the three 
separate machine learning techniques were comparable in predicting OUD, 
achieving an accuracy of >80%. Using the random forest classifier, opioid 
prescription features such as early refills and length of prescription 
consistently ranked among the top five factors that predict new OUD. Younger age 
was positively associated with new OUD, and older age inversely associated with 
new OUD. Age stratification revealed prior substance abuse and alcohol 
dependency as more impactful in predicting OUD for younger patients. There was 
no significant difference in the set of factors associated with new OUD in 
2000-2012 compared to 2013-2021. Characteristics of opioid prescriptions are the 
most impactful variables that predict new OUD both before and after the peak in 
opioid prescribing rates. Predictive models should be tailored to age groups. 
Further research is warranted to determine if machine learning models perform 
better when tailored to other patient subgroups.
297
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is the first sign of dementia among elderly 
populations and its early detection is crucial in our aging societies. Common 
MCI tests are time-consuming such that indiscriminate massive screening would 
not be cost-effective. Here, we describe a protocol that uses machine learning 
techniques to rapidly select candidates for further screening via a 
question-based MCI test. This minimizes the number of resources required for 
screening because only patients who are potentially MCI positive are tested 
further. This methodology was applied in an initial MCI research study that 
formed the starting point for the design of a selective screening decision tree. 
The initial study collected many demographic and lifestyle variables as well as 
details about patient medications. The Short Portable Mental Status 
Questionnaire (SPMSQ) and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) were used to 
detect possible cases of MCI. Finally, we used this method to design an 
efficient process for classifying individuals at risk of MCI. This work also 
provides insights into lifestyle-related factors associated with MCI that could 
be leveraged in the prevention and early detection of MCI among elderly 
populations.
298
BACKGROUND: Semantic verbal fluency (SVF) tests are routinely used in screening 
for mild cognitive impairment (MCI). In this task, participants name as many 
items as possible of a semantic category under a time constraint. Clinicians 
measure task performance manually by summing the number of correct words and 
errors. More fine-grained variables add valuable information to clinical 
assessment, but are time-consuming. Therefore, the aim of this study is to 
investigate whether automatic analysis of the SVF could provide these as 
accurate as manual and thus, support qualitative screening of neurocognitive 
impairment.
METHODS: SVF data were collected from 95 older people with MCI (n = 47), 
Alzheimer's or related dementias (ADRD; n = 24), and healthy controls (HC; n = 
24). All data were annotated manually and automatically with clusters and 
switches. The obtained metrics were validated using a classifier to distinguish 
HC, MCI, and ADRD.
RESULTS: Automatically extracted clusters and switches were highly correlated (r 
= 0.9) with manually established values, and performed as well on the 
classification task separating HC from persons with ADRD (area under curve [AUC] 
= 0.939) and MCI (AUC = 0.758).
CONCLUSION: The results show that it is possible to automate fine-grained 
analyses of SVF data for the assessment of cognitive decline.
299
Aβ-amyloid deposition is a key feature of Alzheimer's disease, but Consortium to 
Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) assessment, based on 
neuritic plaque density, shows a limited relationships to dementia. Thal phase 
is based on a neuroanatomical hierarchy of Aβ-deposition, and in combination 
with Braak neurofibrillary tangle staging also allows derivation of primary 
age-related tauopathy (PART). We sought to determine whether Thal Aβ phase 
predicts dementia better than CERAD in a population-representative cohort 
(n = 186) derived from the Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (CFAS). Cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy (CAA) was quantitied as the number of neuroanatomical areas 
involved and cases meeting criteria for PART were defined to determine if they 
are a distinct pathological group within the ageing population. Agreement with 
the Thal scheme was excellent. In univariate analysis Thal phase performed less 
well as a predictor of dementia than CERAD, Braak or CAA. Logistic regression, 
decision tree and linear discriminant analysis were performed for multivariable 
analysis, with similar results. Thal phase did not provide a better explanation 
of dementia than CERAD, and there was no additional benefit to including more 
than one assessment of Aβ in the model. Number of areas involved by CAA was 
highly correlated with assessment based on a severity score (p < 0.001). The 
presence of capillary involvement (CAA type I) was associated with higher Thal 
phase and Braak stage (p < 0.001). CAA was not associated with microinfarcts 
(p = 0.1). Cases satisfying pathological criteria for PART were present at a 
frequency of 10.2% but were not older and did not have a higher likelihood of 
dementia than a comparison group of individuals with similar Braak stage but 
with more Aβ. They also did not have higher hippocampal-tau stage, although PART 
was weakly associated with increased presence of thorn-shaped astrocytes 
(p = 0.048), suggesting common age-related mechanisms. Thal phase is highly 
applicable in a population-representative setting and allows definition of 
pathological subgroups, such as PART. Thal phase, plaque density, and extent and 
type of CAA measure different aspects of Aβ pathology, but addition of more than 
one Aβ measure does not improve dementia prediction, probably because these 
variables are highly correlated. Machine learning predictions reveal the 
importance of combining neuropathological measurements for the assessment of 
dementia.
300
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is considered one of the most diseases that much 
prevalent among elderly people all over the world. AD is an incurable 
neurodegenerative disease affecting cognitive functions and were characterized 
by progressive and collective functions deteriorating. Remarkably, early 
detection of AD is essential for the development of new and invented treatment 
strategies. As Dementia causes irreversible damage to the brain neurons and 
leads to changes in its structure that can be described adequately within the 
framework of multifractals. Hence, the present work focus on developing a 
promising and efficient computing technique to pre-process and classify the AD 
disease especially in the early stages using multifractal geometry to extract 
the most changeable features due to AD. Then, A machine learning classification 
algorithm (K-Nearest Neighbor) has been implemented in order to classify and 
detect the main four early stages of AD. Two datasets have been used to ensure 
the validation of the proposed methodology. The proposed technique has achieved 
99.4% accuracy and 100% sensitivity. The comparative results show that the 
proposed classification technique outperforms is recent techniques in terms of 
performance measures.
301
Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) present a looming public health 
crisis, affecting roughly 5 million people and 11 % of older adults in the 
United States. Despite nationwide efforts for timely diagnosis of patients with 
ADRD, >50 % of them are not diagnosed and unaware of their disease. To address 
this challenge, we developed ADscreen, an innovative speech-processing based 
ADRD screening algorithm for the protective identification of patients with 
ADRD. ADscreen consists of five major components: (i) noise reduction for 
reducing background noises from the audio-recorded patient speech, (ii) modeling 
the patient's ability in phonetic motor planning using acoustic parameters of 
the patient's voice, (iii) modeling the patient's ability in semantic and 
syntactic levels of language organization using linguistic parameters of the 
patient speech, (iv) extracting vocal and semantic psycholinguistic cues from 
the patient speech, and (v) building and evaluating the screening algorithm. To 
identify important speech parameters (features) associated with ADRD, we used 
the Joint Mutual Information Maximization (JMIM), an effective feature selection 
method for high dimensional, small sample size datasets. Modeling the 
relationship between speech parameters and the outcome variable 
(presence/absence of ADRD) was conducted using three different machine learning 
(ML) architectures with the capability of joining informative acoustic and 
linguistic with contextual word embedding vectors obtained from the DistilBERT 
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers). We evaluated the 
performance of the ADscreen on an audio-recorded patients' speech (verbal 
description) for the Cookie-Theft picture description task, which is publicly 
available in the dementia databank. The joint fusion of acoustic and linguistic 
parameters with contextual word embedding vectors of DistilBERT achieved 
F1-score = 84.64 (standard deviation [std] = ±3.58) and AUC-ROC = 92.53 
(std = ±3.34) for training dataset, and F1-score = 89.55 and AUC-ROC = 93.89 for 
the test dataset. In summary, ADscreen has a strong potential to be integrated 
with clinical workflow to address the need for an ADRD screening tool so that 
patients with cognitive impairment can receive appropriate and timely care.
302
Several studies have demonstrated that fully automated pattern recognition 
methods applied to structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) aid in the 
diagnosis of dementia, but these conclusions are based on highly preselected 
samples that significantly differ from that seen in a dementia clinic. At a 
single dementia clinic, we evaluated the ability of a linear support vector 
machine trained with completely unrelated data to differentiate between 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), Lewy body dementia, and 
healthy aging based on 3D-T1 weighted MRI data sets. Furthermore, we predicted 
progression to AD in subjects with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) at baseline 
and automatically quantified white matter hyperintensities from FLAIR-images. 
Separating additionally recruited healthy elderly from those with dementia was 
accurate with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.97 (according to Fig. 4). 
Multi-class separation of patients with either AD or FTD from other included 
groups was good on the training set (AUC >  0.9) but substantially less accurate 
(AUC = 0.76 for AD, AUC = 0.78 for FTD) on 134 cases from the local clinic. 
Longitudinal data from 28 cases with MCI at baseline and appropriate follow-up 
data were available. The computer tool discriminated progressive from stable MCI 
with AUC = 0.73, compared to AUC = 0.80 for the training set. A relatively low 
accuracy by clinicians (AUC = 0.81) illustrates the difficulties of predicting 
conversion in this heterogeneous cohort. This first application of a MRI-based 
pattern recognition method to a routine sample demonstrates feasibility, but 
also illustrates that automated multi-class differential diagnoses have to be 
the focus of future methodological developments and application studies.
303
PURPOSE: A growing body of research has identified correlates (i.e., predictors) 
of youth homelessness. However, such risk and protective factors have not been 
identified for youth receiving substance use treatment. Using characteristics 
collected at treatment intake, the present study sought to identify predictors 
of youths' first episode of homelessness during the 12 months after substance 
use treatment entry.
METHODS: Data come from a longitudinal study of adolescents (n = 17,911; aged 
12-17 years) receiving substance use treatment throughout the U.S. Participants 
completed surveys at intake and at 3, 6, and 12 months later. Logistic 
regression and Lasso machine learning regression were used to predict 
participants' first episode of homelessness in the 12 months after treatment 
intake.
RESULTS: After excluding adolescents reporting previous experiences of 
homelessness, 5.0% of adolescents reported their first episode of homelessness 
over the 12 months after treatment intake. The results from logistic and lasso 
models were generally consistent. Final models revealed that adolescents who 
were older, male, reported more victimization experiences, mental health 
problems, family problems, deviant peer relationships, and substance use 
problems (more treatment episodes and illicit drug dependence) were more likely 
to report experiencing homelessness. Hispanic/Latino adolescents were less 
likely to experience homelessness, compared with white adolescents.
CONCLUSIONS: The results point to the important risk and protective factors that 
can be assessed at treatment entry to identify adolescents at greater risk of 
experiencing their first episode of homelessness.
304
Early identification of individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is 
essential to combat worldwide dementia threats. Physical function indicators 
might be low-cost early markers for cognitive decline. To establish an early 
identification tool for MCI by combining physical function indicators (upper and 
lower limb function) via a clinical prediction modeling strategy. A total of 
5393 participants aged 60 or older were included in the model. The variables 
selected for the model included sociodemographic characteristics, behavioral 
factors, mental status and chronic conditions, upper limb function (handgrip 
strength), and lower limb function (self-rated squat ability). Two models were 
developed to test the predictive value of handgrip strength (Model 1) or 
self-rated squat ability (Model 2) separately, and Model 3 was developed by 
combining handgrip strength and self-rated squat ability. The 3 models all 
yielded good discrimination performance (area under the curve values ranged from 
0.719 to 0.732). The estimated net reclassification improvement values were 
0.3279 and 0.1862 in Model 3 when comparing Model 3 to Model 1 and Model 2, 
respectively. The integrated discrimination improvement values were estimated as 
0.0139 and 0.0128 when comparing Model 3 with Model 1 and Model 2, respectively. 
The model that contains both upper and lower limb function has better 
performance in predicting MCI. The final prediction model is expected to assist 
health workers in early identification of MCI, thus supporting early 
interventions to reduce future risk of AD, particularly in socioeconomically 
deprived communities.
305
Data from 255 Thais with chronic pain were collected at Chiang Mai Medical 
School Hospital. After the patients self-rated their level of pain, a smartphone 
camera was used to capture faces for 10 s at a one-meter distance. For those 
unable to self-rate, a video recording was taken immediately after the move that 
causes the pain. The trained assistant rated each video clip for the pain 
assessment in advanced dementia (PAINAD). The pain was classified into three 
clips into 18 facial action units (FAUs). Five classification models were used, 
including logistic regression, multilayer perception, naïve Bayes, decision 
tree, k-nearest neighbors (KNN), and support vector machine (SVM). Out of the 
models that only used FAU described in the literature (FAU 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 25, 
26, 27, and 45), multilayer perception is the most accurate, at 50%. The SVM 
model using FAU 1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 10, 12, 20, 25, and 45, and gender had the best 
accuracy of 58% among the machine learning selection features. Our open-source 
experiment for automatically analyzing video clips for FAUs is not robust for 
classifying pain in the elderly. The consensus method to transform facial 
recognition algorithm values comparable to the human ratings, and international 
good practice for reciprocal sharing of data may improve the accuracy and 
feasibility of the machine learning's facial pain rater.
306
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to identify the main keywords, network 
properties, and main topics of news articles related to artificial intelligence 
technology in the field of nursing.
METHODS: After collecting artificial intelligence-and nursing-related news 
articles published between January 1, 1991, and July 24, 2022, keywords were 
extracted via preprocessing. A total of 3,267 articles were searched, and 2,996 
were used for the final analysis. Text network analysis and topic modeling were 
performed using NetMiner 4.4.
RESULTS: As a result of analyzing the frequency of appearance, the keywords used 
most frequently were education, medical robot, telecom, dementia, and the older 
adults living alone. Keyword network analysis revealed the following results: a 
density of 0.002, an average degree of 8.79, and an average distance of 2.43; 
the central keywords identified were 'education,' 'medical robot,' and 'fourth 
industry.' Five topics were derived from news articles related to artificial 
intelligence and nursing: 'Artificial intelligence nursing research and 
development in the health and medical field,' 'Education using artificial 
intelligence for children and youth care,' 'Nursing robot for older adults 
care,' 'Community care policy and artificial intelligence,' and 'Smart care 
technology in an aging society.'
CONCLUSION: The use of artificial intelligence may be helpful among the local 
community, older adult, children, and adolescents. In particular, health 
management using artificial intelligence is indispensable now that we are facing 
a super-aging society. In the future, studies on nursing intervention and 
development of nursing programs using artificial intelligence should be 
conducted.
307
AIMS: The aim of this study was to develop a predictive model that can identify 
the suicidal ideation risk group among older adults in rural areas using machine 
learning methods.
DESIGN: This study applied an exploratory, descriptive and cross-sectional 
design.
METHODS: The participants were older adults (N = 650) aged over 65 living in 
rural areas of South Korea. Self-report questionnaires were used to collect the 
demographics, suicidal ideation, depression, socioeconomic information and basic 
health information from September to October 2020. The collected data were 
analysed using machine learning methods with R statistical software 4.1.0.
RESULTS: The predictive models indicated that depression, pain, age and 
loneliness were significant factors of suicidal ideation. Good performance was 
observed based on the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve in 
the decision tree, random forest and logistic regression. Finally, the 
evaluation of model performance indicated moderate to high sensitivity and 
specificity.
CONCLUSION: The predictive models using machine learning methods may be useful 
to predict the risk of suicidal ideation. Furthermore, depression with pain, age 
and feelings of loneliness should be included in the initial screening to assess 
suicide risk among older adults in rural areas.
IMPACT: Identifying suicidal risk among older adults is challenging. Thus, 
employing predictive models that can assess depression, pain, age and loneliness 
can enable public healthcare providers to detect suicidal risk groups. 
Particularly, the presented models from this study can facilitate healthcare 
providers with initiating early interventions to prevent suicide among older 
adults in clinical and community nursing care settings.
REPORTING METHOD: The reporting of this study (Observational, cross-sectional 
study) conforms to the STROBE statement.
PATIENT OR PUBLIC CONTRIBUTION: No patient or public contribution. This study 
did not involve patients, service users, caregivers or members of the public.
IMPLICATION FOR THE PROFESSION AND/OR PATIENTS CARE: Applying this model may 
help to prevent geriatric suicide because the nursing staff will have a greater 
awareness regarding the suicide ideation risk of older adults, thereby reducing 
the possibility of their suicide.
308
Facial expressions of pain are important in assessing individuals with dementia 
and severe communicative limitations. Though frontal views of the face are 
assumed to allow for the most valid and reliable observational assessments, the 
impact of viewing angle is unknown. We video-recorded older adults with and 
without dementia using cameras capturing different observational angles (e.g., 
front vs. profile view) both during a physiotherapy examination designed to 
identify painful areas and during a baseline period. Facial responses were coded 
using the fine-grained Facial Action Coding System, as well as a systematic 
clinical observation method. Coding was conducted separately for panoramic 
(incorporating left, right, and front views), and a profile view of the face. 
Untrained observers also judged the videos in a laboratory setting. Trained 
coder reliability was satisfactory for both the profile and panoramic view. 
Untrained observer judgments from a profile view were substantially more 
accurate compared to the front view and accounted for more variance in 
differentiating non-painful from painful situations. The findings add 
specificity to the communications models of pain (clarifying factors influencing 
observers' ability to decode pain messages). Perhaps more importantly, the 
findings have implications for the development of computer vision algorithms and 
vision technologies designed to monitor and interpret facial expressions in a 
pain context. That is, the performance of such automated systems is heavily 
influenced by how reliably these human annotations could be provided and, hence, 
evaluation of human observers' reliability, from multiple angles of observation, 
has implications for machine learning development efforts.
309
INTRODUCTION: Assessment of episodic memory is traditionally used to evaluate 
potential cognitive impairments in senior adults. The present article discusses 
the capabilities of Episodix, a game to assess the aforementioned cognitive 
area, as a valid tool to discriminate among mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and healthy individuals (HC); that is, it studies the 
game's psychometric validity study to assess cognitive impairment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: After a preliminary study, a new pilot study, 
statistically significant for the Galician population, was carried out from a 
cross-sectional sample of senior adults as target users. A total of 64 
individuals (28 HC, 16 MCI, 20 AD) completed the experiment from an initial 
sample of 74. Participants were administered a collection of classical 
pen-and-paper tests and interacted with the games developed. A total of six 
machine learning classification techniques were applied and four relevant 
performance metrics were computed to assess the classification power of the tool 
according to participants' cognitive status.
RESULTS: According to the classification performance metrics computed, the best 
classification result is obtained using the Extra Trees Classifier (F1 = 0.97 
and Cohen's kappa coefficient = 0.97). Precision and recall values are also 
high, above 0.9 for all cognitive groups. Moreover, according to the standard 
interpretation of Cohen's kappa index, classification is almost perfect (i.e., 
0.81-1.00) for the complete dataset for all algorithms.
LIMITATIONS: Weaknesses (e.g., accessibility, sample size or speed of stimuli) 
detected during the preliminary study were addressed and solved. Nevertheless, 
additional research is needed to improve the resolution of the game for the 
identification of specific cognitive impairments, as well as to achieve a 
complete validation of the psychometric properties of the digital game.
CONCLUSION: Promising results obtained about psychometric validity of Episodix, 
represent a relevant step ahead towards the introduction of serious games and 
machine learning in regular clinical practice for detecting MCI or AD. However, 
more research is needed to explore the introduction of item response theory in 
this game and to obtain the required normative data for clinical validity.
310
BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a highly heterogeneous condition 
in terms of symptom presentation and, likely, underlying pathophysiology. 
Accordingly, it is possible that only certain individuals with MDD are 
well-suited to antidepressants. A potentially fruitful approach to parsing this 
heterogeneity is to focus on promising endophenotypes of depression, such as 
neuroticism, anhedonia, and cognitive control deficits.
METHODS: Within an 8-week multisite trial of sertraline v. placebo for depressed 
adults (n = 216), we examined whether the combination of machine learning with a 
Personalized Advantage Index (PAI) can generate individualized treatment 
recommendations on the basis of endophenotype profiles coupled with clinical and 
demographic characteristics.
RESULTS: Five pre-treatment variables moderated treatment response. Higher 
depression severity and neuroticism, older age, less impairment in cognitive 
control, and being employed were each associated with better outcomes to 
sertraline than placebo. Across 1000 iterations of a 10-fold cross-validation, 
the PAI model predicted that 31% of the sample would exhibit a clinically 
meaningful advantage [post-treatment Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD) 
difference ⩾3] with sertraline relative to placebo. Although there were no 
overall outcome differences between treatment groups (d = 0.15), those 
identified as optimally suited to sertraline at pre-treatment had better week 8 
HRSD scores if randomized to sertraline (10.7) than placebo (14.7) (d = 0.58).
CONCLUSIONS: A subset of MDD patients optimally suited to sertraline can be 
identified on the basis of pre-treatment characteristics. This model must be 
tested prospectively before it can be used to inform treatment selection. 
However, findings demonstrate the potential to improve individual outcomes 
through algorithm-guided treatment recommendations.
311
AIM: The authors applied natural language processing and machine learning to 
explore the disease-related language patterns that warrant objective measures 
for assessing language ability in Japanese patients with Alzheimer disease (AD), 
while most previous studies have used large publicly available data sets in 
Euro-American languages.
METHODS: The authors obtained 276 speech samples from 42 patients with AD and 52 
healthy controls, aged 50 years or older. A natural language processing library 
for Python was used, spaCy, with an add-on library, GiNZA, which is a Japanese 
parser based on Universal Dependencies designed to facilitate multilingual 
parser development. The authors used eXtreme Gradient Boosting for our 
classification algorithm. Each unit of part-of-speech and dependency was tagged 
and counted to create features such as tag-frequency and tag-to-tag 
transition-frequency. Each feature's importance was computed during the 100-fold 
repeated random subsampling validation and averaged.
RESULTS: The model resulted in an accuracy of 0.84 (SD = 0.06), and an area 
under the curve of 0.90 (SD = 0.03). Among the features that were important for 
such predictions, seven of the top 10 features were related to part-of-speech, 
while the remaining three were related to dependency. A box plot analysis 
demonstrated that the appearance rates of content words-related features were 
lower among the patients, whereas those with stagnation-related features were 
higher.
CONCLUSION: The current study demonstrated a promising level of accuracy for 
predicting AD and found the language patterns corresponding to the type of 
lexical-semantic decline known as 'empty speech', which is regarded as a 
characteristic of AD.
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Japanese Society of Psychiatry and 
312
INTRODUCTION: The differentiation of Lewy body dementia from other common 
dementia types clinically is difficult, with a considerable number of cases only 
being found post-mortem. Consequently, there is a clear need for inexpensive and 
accurate diagnostic approaches for clinical use. Electroencephalography (EEG) is 
one potential candidate due to its relatively low cost and non-invasive nature. 
Previous studies examining the use of EEG as a dementia diagnostic have focussed 
on the eyes closed (EC) resting state; however, eyes open (EO) EEG may also be a 
useful adjunct to quantitative analysis due to clinical availability.
METHODS: We extracted spectral properties from EEG signals recorded under 
research study protocols (1024 Hz sampling rate, 10:5 EEG layout). The data 
stems from a total of 40 dementia patients with an average age of 74.42, 75.81 
and 73.88 years for Alzheimer's disease (AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
and Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD), respectively, and 15 healthy controls 
(HC) with an average age of 76.93 years. We utilised k-nearest neighbour, 
support vector machine and logistic regression machine learning to differentiate 
between groups utilising spectral data from the delta, theta, high theta, alpha 
and beta EEG bands.
RESULTS: We found that the combination of EC and EO resting state EEG data 
significantly increased inter-group classification accuracy compared to methods 
not using EO data. Secondly, we observed a distinct increase in the dominant 
frequency variance for HC between the EO and EC state, which was not observed 
within any dementia subgroup. For inter-group classification, we achieved a 
specificity of 0.87 and sensitivity of 0.92 for HC vs dementia classification 
and 0.75 specificity and 0.91 sensitivity for AD vs DLB classification, with a 
k-nearest neighbour machine learning model which outperformed other machine 
learning methods.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of our study indicate that the combination of both EC 
and EO quantitative EEG features improves overall classification accuracy when 
classifying dementia types in older age adults. In addition, we demonstrate that 
healthy controls display a definite change in dominant frequency variance 
between the EC and EO state. In future, a validation cohort should be utilised 
to further solidify these findings.
313
Brain arteriolosclerosis, one of the main pathologies of cerebral small vessel 
disease, is common in older adults and has been linked to lower cognitive and 
motor function and higher odds of dementia. In spite of its frequency and 
associated morbidity, arteriolosclerosis can only be diagnosed at autopsy. 
Therefore, the purpose of this work was to develop an in-vivo classifier of 
arteriolosclerosis based on brain MRI. First, an ex-vivo classifier of 
arteriolosclerosis was developed based on features related to white matter 
hyperintensities, diffusion anisotropy and demographics by applying machine 
learning to ex-vivo MRI and pathology data from 119 participants of the Rush 
Memory and Aging Project (MAP) and Religious Orders Study (ROS), two 
longitudinal cohort studies of aging that recruit non-demented older adults. The 
ex-vivo classifier showed good performance in predicting the presence of 
arteriolosclerosis, with an average area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve AUC = 0.78. The ex-vivo classifier was then translated to 
in-vivo based on available in-vivo and ex-vivo MRI data on the same 
participants. The in-vivo classifier was named ARTS (short for 
ARTerioloSclerosis), is fully automated, and provides a score linked to the 
likelihood a person suffers from arteriolosclerosis. The performance of ARTS in 
predicting the presence of arteriolosclerosis in-vivo was tested in a separate, 
91% dementia-free group of 79 MAP/ROS participants and exhibited an AUC = 0.79 
in persons with antemortem intervals shorter than 2.4 years. This level of 
performance in mostly non-demented older adults is notable considering that 
arteriolosclerosis can only be diagnosed at autopsy. The scan-rescan 
reproducibility of the ARTS score was excellent, with an intraclass correlation 
of 0.99, suggesting that application of ARTS in longitudinal studies may show 
high sensitivity in detecting small changes. Finally, higher ARTS scores in 
non-demented older adults were associated with greater decline in cognition two 
years after baseline MRI, especially in perceptual speed which has been linked 
to arteriolosclerosis and small vessel disease. This finding was shown in a 
separate group of 369 non-demented MAP/ROS participants and was validated in 72 
non-demented Black participants of the Minority Aging Research Study (MARS) and 
also in 244 non-demented participants of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative 2 and 3. The results of this work suggest that ARTS may have broad 
implications in the advancement of diagnosis, prevention and treatment of 
arteriolosclerosis. ARTS is publicly available at 
314
Cognitive disability following traumatic experiences of disaster has been 
documented; however, little is known about heterogeneity in the association 
across individuals. In this natural experiment study of approximately 3000 
Japanese older adults in an area directly affected by the 2011 Great East Japan 
Earthquake, the baseline survey was established 7 months before the 2011 
earthquake. To inductively identify heterogeneity in postdisaster cognitive 
disability by predisaster characteristics, we applied a machine learning–based 
causal inference approach—generalized random forest. We identified strong 
evidence for heterogeneity in the association between home loss and cognitive 
disability objectively assessed 2.5 and 5.5 years after the 2011 earthquake. The 
subgroups with the strongest disaster-dementia associations tended to be from 
low socioeconomic backgrounds and have predisaster health problems. The study 
demonstrated that some subpopulations are particularly prone to experience 
cognitive disability after disasters, which could be overlooked in studies 
assessing population average associations only.
315
OBJECTIVE: To compare cognitive phenotypes of participants with subjective 
cognitive decline (SCD) and amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), estimate 
progression to MCI/dementia by phenotype and assess classification error with 
machine learning.
METHOD: Dataset consisted of 163 participants with SCD and 282 participants with 
aMCI from the Czech Brain Aging Study. Cognitive assessment included the Uniform 
Data Set battery and additional tests to ascertain executive function, language, 
immediate and delayed memory, visuospatial skills, and processing speed. Latent 
profile analyses were used to develop cognitive profiles, and Cox proportional 
hazards models were used to estimate risk of progression. Random forest machine 
learning algorithms reported cognitive phenotype classification error.
RESULTS: Latent profile analysis identified three phenotypes for SCD, with one 
phenotype performing worse across all domains but not progressing more quickly 
to MCI/dementia after controlling for age, sex, and education. Three aMCI 
phenotypes were characterized by mild deficits, memory and language impairment 
(dysnomic aMCI), and severe multi-domain aMCI (i.e., deficits across all 
domains). A dose-response relationship between baseline level of impairment and 
subsequent risk of progression to dementia was evident for aMCI profiles after 
controlling for age, sex, and education. Machine learning more easily classified 
participants with aMCI in comparison to SCD (8% vs. 21% misclassified).
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive performance follows distinct patterns, especially within 
aMCI. The patterns map onto risk of progression to dementia.
316
BACKGROUND: COVID-19 has been associated with an increased risk of incident 
dementia (post-COVID dementia). Establishing additional risk markers may help 
identify at-risk individuals and guide clinical decision-making.
METHODS: We investigated pre-COVID psychotropic medication use (exposure) and 
1-year incidence of dementia (outcome) in 1,755 patients (≥65 years) 
hospitalized with COVID-19. Logistic regression models were used to examine the 
association, adjusting for demographic and clinical variables. For further 
confirmation, we applied the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator 
(LASSO) regression and a machine learning (Random Forest) algorithm.
RESULTS: One-year incidence rate of post-COVID dementia was 12.7% (N = 223). 
Pre-COVID psychotropic medications (OR = 2.7, 95% CI: 1.8-4.0, P < 0.001) and 
delirium (OR = 3.0, 95% CI: 1.9-4.6, P < 0.001) were significantly associated 
with greater 1-year incidence of post-COVID dementia. The association between 
psychotropic medications and incident dementia remained robust when the analysis 
was restricted to the 423 patients with at least one documented neurological or 
psychiatric diagnosis at the time of COVID-19 admission (OR = 3.09, 95% CI: 
1.5-6.6, P = 0.002). Across different drug classes, antipsychotics (OR = 2.8, 
95% CI: 1.7-4.4, P < 0.001) and mood stabilizers/anticonvulsants (OR = 2.4, 95% 
CI: 1.39-4.02, P = 0.001) displayed the greatest association with post-COVID 
dementia. The association of psychotropic medication with dementia was further 
confirmed with Random Forest and LASSO analysis.
CONCLUSION: Confirming prior studies we observed a high dementia incidence in 
older patients after COVID-19 hospitalization. Pre-COVID psychotropic 
medications were associated with higher risk of incident dementia. Psychotropic 
medications may be risk markers that signify neuropsychiatric symptoms during 
prodromal dementia, and not mutually exclusive, contribute to post-COVID 
dementia.
317
Late-onset Alzheimer's Disease (LOAD) is the most common form of dementia in the 
elderly. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for LOAD have open new avenues 
to identify genetic causes and to provide diagnostic tools for early detection. 
Although several predictive models have been proposed using the few detected 
GWAS markers, there is still a need for improvement and identification of 
potential markers. Commonly, polygenic risk scores are being used for 
prediction. Nevertheless, other methods to generate predictive models have been 
suggested. In this research, we compared three machine learning methods that 
have been proved to construct powerful predictive models (genetic algorithms, 
LASSO, and step-wise) and propose the inclusion of markers from misclassified 
samples to improve overall prediction accuracy. Our results show that the 
addition of markers from an initial model plus the markers of the model fitted 
to misclassified samples improves the area under the receiving operative curve 
by around 5%, reaching ~0.84, which is highly competitive using only genetic 
information. The computational strategy used here can help to devise better 
methods to improve classification models for AD. Our results could have a 
positive impact on the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.
318
Few longitudinal studies have systematically investigated whether or how 
individual musculoskeletal conditions (IMCs) convey risks for negative 
psychological health outcomes, and approaches to assess such risk in the older 
population are lacking. In this Irish nationally representative longitudinal 
prospective study of 6,715 individuals aged 50 and above, machine learning 
algorithms and various models, including mediation models, were employed to 
elaborate the underlying mechanisms of IMCs leading to depression and to develop 
an IMC-induced negative psychological risk (IMCPR) classification approach. 
Resultantly, arthritis [odds ratio (95% confidence interval): 2.233 
(1.700-2.927)], osteoporosis [1.681 (1.133-2.421)], and musculoskeletal chronic 
pain [MCP, 2.404 (1.838-3.151)] were found to increase the risk of depression 
after 2 years, while fracture and joint replacement did not. Interestingly, 
mediation models further demonstrated that arthritis per se did not increase the 
risk of depression; such risk was augmented only when arthritis-induced 
restrictions of activities (ARA) existed [proportion of mediation: 316.3% (ARA 
of usual), 213.3% (ARA of social and leisure), and 251.3% (ARA of sleep)]. The 
random forest algorithm attested that osteoarthritis, not rheumatoid arthritis, 
contributed the most to depressive symptoms. Moreover, bone mineral density was 
negatively associated with depressive symptoms. Systemic pain contributed the 
most to the increased risk of depression, followed by back, knee, hip, and foot 
pain (mean Gini-Index: 3.778, 2.442, 1.980, 1.438, and 0.879, respectively). 
Based on the aforementioned findings, the IMCPR classification approach was 
developed using an interpretable machine learning model, which stratifies 
participants into three grades. Among the IMCPR grades, patients with a grade of 
"severe" had higher odds of depression than those with a "mild" [odds ratio (95% 
confidence interval): 4.055 (2.907-5.498)] or "moderate" [3.584 (2.101-5.883)] 
grade. Females with a "severe" grade had higher odds of depression by 334.0% 
relative to those with a "mild" grade, while males had a relative risk of 
258.4%. In conclusion, the present data provide systematic insights into the 
IMC-induced depression risk and updated the related clinical knowledge. 
Furthermore, the IMCPR classification approach could be used as an effective 
tool to evaluate this risk.
319
BACKGROUND: Informal caregivers report substantial burden and depressive 
symptoms which predict higher rates of patient institutionalization. While 
caregiver education interventions may reduce caregiver distress and decrease the 
use of long-term institutional care, evidence is mixed. Inconsistent findings 
across studies may be the result of reporting average treatment effects which do 
not account for how effects differ by participant characteristics. We apply a 
machine-learning approach to randomized clinical trial (RCT) data of the Helping 
Invested Family Members Improve Veteran's Experiences Study (HI-FIVES) 
intervention to explore how intervention effects vary by caregiver and patient 
characteristics.
METHODS: We used model-based recursive partitioning models. Caregivers of 
community-residing older adult US veterans with functional or cognitive 
impairment at a single VA Medical Center site were randomized to receive 
HI-FIVES (n = 118) vs. usual care (n = 123). The outcomes included cumulative 
days not in the community and caregiver depressive symptoms assessed at 12 
months post intervention. Potential moderating characteristics were: veteran 
age, caregiver age, caregiver ethnicity and race, relationship satisfaction, 
caregiver burden, perceived financial strain, caregiver depressive symptoms, and 
patient risk score.
RESULTS: The effect of HI-FIVES on days not at home was moderated by caregiver 
burden (p < 0.001); treatment effects were higher for caregivers with a Zarit 
Burden Scale score ≤ 28. Caregivers with lower baseline Center for Epidemiologic 
Studies Depression Scale (CESD-10) scores (≤ 8) had slightly lower CESD-10 
scores at follow-up (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Family caregiver education interventions may be less beneficial for 
highly burdened and distressed caregivers; these caregivers may require a more 
tailored approach that involves assessing caregiver needs and developing 
personalized approaches.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, ID:NCT01777490. Registered on 28 January 
2013.
320
The brain signature concept aims to characterize brain regions most strongly 
associated with an outcome of interest. Brain signatures derive their power from 
data-driven searches that select features based solely on performance metrics of 
prediction or classification. This approach has important potential to delineate 
biologically relevant brain substrates for prediction or classification of 
future trajectories. Recent work has used exploratory voxel-wise or atlas-based 
searches, with some using machine learning techniques to define salient 
features. These have shown undoubted usefulness, but two issues remain. The 
preponderance of recent work has been aimed at categorical rather than 
continuous outcomes, and it is rare for non-atlas reliant voxel-based signatures 
to be reported that would be useful for modelling and hypothesis testing. We 
describe a cross-validated signature region model for structural brain 
components associated with baseline and longitudinal episodic memory across 
cognitively heterogeneous populations including normal, mild impairment and 
dementia. We used three non-overlapping cohorts of older participants: from the 
UC Davis Aging and Diversity cohort (n = 255; mean age 75.3 ± 7.1 years; 128 
cognitively normal, 97 mild cognitive impairment, 30 demented and seven 
unclassified); from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 1 
(n = 379; mean age 75.1 ± 7.2; 82 cognitively normal, 176 mild cognitive 
impairment, 121 Alzheimer's dementia); and from ADNI2/GO (n = 680; mean age 
72.5 ± 7.1; 220 cognitively normal, 381 mild cognitive impairment and 79 
Alzheimer's dementia). We used voxel-wise regression analysis, correcting for 
multiple comparisons, to generate an array of regional masks corresponding to 
different association strength levels of cortical grey matter with baseline 
memory and brain atrophy with memory change. Cognitive measures were episodic 
memory using Spanish and English Neuropsychological Assessment Scales 
instruments for UC Davis and ADNI-Mem for ADNI 1 and ADNI2/GO. Performance 
metric was the adjusted R2 coefficient of determination of each model explaining 
outcomes in two cohorts other than where it was computed. We compared 
within-cohort performances of signature models against each other and against 
other recent signature models of episodic memory. Findings were: (i) two 
independently generated signature region of interest models performed similarly 
in a third separate cohort; (ii) a signature region of interest generated in one 
imaging cohort replicated its performance level when explaining cognitive 
outcomes in each of other, separate cohorts; and (iii) this approach better 
explained baseline and longitudinal memory than other recent theory-driven and 
data-driven models. This suggests our approach can generate signatures that may 
be easily and robustly applied for modelling and hypothesis testing in mixed 
cognition cohorts.
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
321
The transitional expression and aggregation of amyloid β (Aβ) are the most 
important causative factors leading to the deterioration of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), a commonly occurring metabolic disease among older people. Antioxidant 
agents such as vitamin C (Vc) have shown potential effects against AD and aging. 
We applied an liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry 
(LC-MS/MS) method and differential metabolites strategy to explore the metabolic 
disorders and Vc restoration in a human Aβ transgenic (Punc-54::Aβ1-42) nematode 
model CL2006. We combined the LC-MS/MS investigation with the KEGG and HMDB 
databases and the CFM-ID machine-learning model to identify and qualify the 
metabolites with important physiological roles. The differential metabolites 
responding to Aβ activation and Vc treatment were filtered out and submitted to 
enrichment analysis. The enrichment showed that Aβ mainly caused abnormal 
biosynthesis and metabolism pathways of phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan 
biosynthesis, as well as arginine and proline metabolism. Vc reversed the 
abnormally changed metabolites tryptophan, anthranilate, indole and 
indole-3-acetaldehyde. Vc restoration affected the tryptophan metabolism and the 
biosynthesis of phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan. Our findings provide 
supporting evidence for understanding the metabolic abnormalities in 
neurodegenerative diseases and the repairing effect of drug interventions.
322
Previous researchers have proposed intelligent systems for therapeutic 
monitoring of cognitive impairments. However, most existing practical approaches 
for this purpose are based on manual tests. This raises issues such as excessive 
caretaking effort and the white-coat effect. To avoid these issues, we present 
an intelligent conversational system for entertaining elderly people with news 
of their interest that monitors cognitive impairment transparently. Automatic 
chatbot dialogue stages allow assessing content description skills and detecting 
cognitive impairment with Machine Learning algorithms. We create these dialogue 
flows automatically from updated news items using Natural Language Generation 
techniques. The system also infers the gold standard of the answers to the 
questions, so it can assess cognitive capabilities automatically by comparing 
these answers with the user responses. It employs a similarity metric with 
values in [0, 1], in increasing level of similarity. To evaluate the performance 
and usability of our approach, we have conducted field tests with a test group 
of 30 elderly people in the earliest stages of dementia, under the supervision 
of gerontologists. In the experiments, we have analysed the effect of stress and 
concentration in these users. Those without cognitive impairment performed up to 
five times better. In particular, the similarity metric varied between 0.03, for 
stressed and unfocused participants, and 0.36, for relaxed and focused users. 
Finally, we developed a Machine Learning algorithm based on textual analysis 
features for automatic cognitive impairment detection, which attained accuracy, 
F-measure and recall levels above 80%. We have thus validated the automatic 
approach to detect cognitive impairment in elderly people based on entertainment 
content. The results suggest that the solution has strong potential for 
long-term user-friendly therapeutic monitoring of elderly people.
323
BACKGROUND: It is well-documented in the orthopedic literature that 1 in 5 
patients are dissatisfied following total knee arthroplasty (TKA). However, 
multiple statistical models have failed to explain the causes of 
dissatisfaction. Furthermore, payers are interested in using patient-reported 
satisfaction scores to adjust surgeon reimbursement rates without a full 
understanding of the influencing parameters. The purpose of this study was to 
more comprehensively identify predictors of satisfaction and compare results 
using both a statistical model and a machine learning (ML) algorithm.
METHODS: A retrospective review of consecutive TKAs performed by 2 surgeons was 
conducted. Identical perioperative protocols were utilized by both surgeons. 
Patients were grouped as satisfied or unsatisfied based on self-reported 
satisfaction scores. Fifteen variables were correlated with satisfaction using 
binary logistic regression and stochastic gradient boosted ML models.
RESULTS: In total, 1325 consecutive TKAs were performed. After exclusions, 897 
TKAs were available with minimum 1-year follow-up. Overall, 85.3% of patients 
were satisfied. Older age generation and performing surgeon were predictors of 
satisfaction in both models. The ML model also retained 
cruciate-retaining/condylar-stabilizing implant; lack of inflammatory 
conditions, preoperative narcotic use, depression, and lumbar spine pain; female 
gender; and a preserved posterior cruciate ligament as predictors of 
satisfaction which allowed for a significantly higher area under the receiver 
operator characteristic curve compared to the binary logistic regression model 
(0.81 vs 0.60).
CONCLUSION: Findings indicate that patient satisfaction may be multifactorial 
with some factors beyond the scope of a surgeon's control. Further study is 
warranted to investigate predictors of patient satisfaction particularly with 
awareness of differences in results between traditional statistical models and 
ML algorithms.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic Level III.
324
BACKGROUND: Preventatives measures to combat the spread of COVID- 19 have 
introduced social isolation, loneliness and financial stress. This study aims to 
identify whether the COVID-19 pandemic is related to changes in suicide-related 
problems for help seekers on a suicide prevention helpline.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted using chat data from a 
suicide prevention helpline in the Netherlands. The natural language processing 
method BERTopic was used to detect common topics in messages from December 1, 
2019 until June 1, 2020 (N = 8589). Relative topic occurrence was compared 
before and during the lock down starting on March 23, 2020. The observed changes 
in topic usage were likewise analyzed for male and female, younger and older 
help seekers and help seekers living alone.
RESULTS: The topic of the COVID-19 pandemic saw an 808% increase in relative 
occurrence after the lockdown. Furthermore, the results show that help seeker 
increased mention of thanking the counsellor (+ 15%), and male and young help 
seekers were grateful for the conversation (+ 45% and + 32% respectively). 
Coping methods such as watching TV (- 21%) or listening to music (- 15%) saw a 
decreased mention. Plans for suicide (- 9%) and plans for suicide at a specific 
location (- 15%) also saw a decreased mention. However, plans for suicide were 
mentioned more frequently by help seekers over 30 years old (+ 11%) or who live 
alone and (+ 52%). Furthermore, male help seekers talked about contact with 
emergency care (+ 43%) and panic and anxiety (+ 24%) more often. Negative 
emotions (+ 22%) and lack of self-confidence (+ 15%) were mentioned more often 
by help seekers under 30, and help seekers over 30 saw an increased mention of 
substance abuse (+ 9%).
CONCLUSION: While mentions of distraction, social interaction and plans for 
suicide decreased, expressions of gratefulness for the helpline increased, 
highlighting the importance of contact to help seekers during the lockdown. Help 
seekers under 30, male or who live alone, showed changes that negatively related 
to suicidality and should be monitored closely.
325
Machine learning has been applied to neuroimaging data for estimating brain age 
and capturing early cognitive impairment in neurodegenerative diseases. Blood 
parameters like neurofilament light chain are associated with aging. In order to 
improve brain age predictive accuracy, we constructed a model based on both 
brain structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) and blood parameters. Healthy 
subjects (n = 93; 37 males; aged 50-85 years) were recruited. A deep learning 
network was firstly pretrained on a large set of MRI scans (n = 1,481; 659 
males; aged 50-85 years) downloaded from multiple open-source datasets, to 
provide weights on our recruited dataset. Evaluating the network on the 
recruited dataset resulted in mean absolute error (MAE) of 4.91 years and a high 
correlation (r = .67, p <.001) against chronological age. The sMRI data were 
then combined with five blood biochemical indicators including GLU, TG, TC, 
ApoA1 and ApoB, and 9 dementia-associated biomarkers including ApoE genotype, 
HCY, NFL, TREM2, Aβ40, Aβ42, T-tau, TIMP1, and VLDLR to construct a bilinear 
fusion model, which achieved a more accurate prediction of brain age (MAE, 
3.96 years; r = .76, p <.001). Notably, the fusion model achieved better 
improvement in the group of older subjects (70-85 years). Extracted attention 
maps of the network showed that amygdala, pallidum, and olfactory were effective 
for age estimation. Mediation analysis further showed that brain structural 
features and blood parameters provided independent and significant impact. The 
constructed age prediction model may have promising potential in evaluation of 
brain health based on MRI and blood parameters.
326
BACKGROUND: The Salzburg Dementia Test Prediction (SDTP), developed using 
artificial intelligence and based on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
was recently introduced as a brief cognitive screening tool for cognitive 
impairment.
OBJECTIVE: In the current study, we investigated whether the STDP can be used as 
a valid bed-side cognitive screening tool for dementia patients, in an 
English-speaking, medical inpatient setting.
METHODS: 216 medically ill older patients who had completed the MMSE (from which 
the SDTP scores can be calculated), with a subsample 58 patients who had also 
completed the ACE-R/ACE-III scales. Diagnosis of one of four dementia types 
(n = 127) and socio-demographic information were also collected. MMSE, SDTP, 
ACE-R/ACE-III, and dementia diagnosis were used to examine the construct 
validity of the SDTP through assessments of the structural, concurrent, and 
convergent validity.
RESULTS: The SDTP shows structural validity through demonstrating 
uni-dimensionality. Construct validity was demonstrated by sufficient 
correlation sizes with MMSE scores against a benchmark correlation size for most 
of the subsample, except vascular dementia. Convergent validity was demonstrated 
for the STDP with equivalent correlations sizes with ACE-R/ACE-III as the MMSE 
across all samples, though for vascular dementia the magnitude of this 
correlation was not as strong.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support using STDP as a brief assessment tool among 
patients who have been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body disease, 
and mixed dementia; however, there is some statistical variability to overall 
MMSE scores and correlations with the ACE-R/ACE-III among patients diagnosed 
with vascular dementia.
327
OBJECTIVES: The rate of drug overdose deaths in the USA has more than tripled 
since the turn of the century, and rates are disproportionately high among the 
American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) population. Little is known about the 
overall historical trends in AI/AN opioid-only and opioid/polysubstance-related 
mortality. This study will address this gap.
DESIGN: This is a retrospective longitudinal ecological study.
SETTING: US death records from 1999 to 2019 using the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention Wide-Ranging Online Data for Epidemiologic Research.
PARTICIPANTS: US non-Hispanic AI/AN people age 12 years and older.
MEASURES: The primary outcomes, identified via the 10th revision of the 
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 
codes, included overdose deaths due to (1) opioids only, opioids in combination 
with any other substance, all-opioid related overdoses; (2) combinations of 
opioids and alcohol, opioids and methamphetamine, opioids and cocaine, opioids 
and benzodiazepines; and (3) specific types of opioids.
RESULTS: From 1999 to 2019, opioid-only mortality rates increased from 2.8 to 
15.8 per 100 000 (p<0.001) for AI/AN women and 4.6 to 25.6 per 100 000 (p<0.001) 
for AI/AN men. All opioid-related mortality rates increased significantly 
(p<0.001) from 5.2 to 33.9 per 100 000 AI/AN persons, 3.9 to 26.1 for women and 
6.5 to 42.1 for men. AI/AN also exhibited significant increases in mortality 
rates due to opioids and alcohol, opioids and benzodiazepines, opioids and 
methamphetamine, and AI/AN men experienced substantial increases in mortality 
due to opioids and cocaine. Mortality rates by individual opioid types increased 
significantly over time for heroin, natural and semi-synthetic (prescription), 
and synthetic opioids (fentanyl/fentanyl analogues) other than methadone.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight magnification over time in opioid-related 
deaths and may point to broader systemic factors that may disproportionately 
affect members of AI/AN communities and drive inequities.
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
328
Background and Aims: COVID-19 has been proven to harm adolescents' mental 
health, and several psychological influence factors have been proposed. However, 
the importance of these factors in the development of mood disorders in 
adolescents during the pandemic still eludes researchers, and practical 
strategies for mental health education are limited. Methods: We constructed a 
sample of 1,771 adolescents from three junior high middle schools, three senior 
high middle schools, and three independent universities in Shandong province, 
China. The sample stratification was set as 5:4:3 for adolescent aged from 12 - 
15, 15 - 18, 18 - 19. We examined the subjects' anxiety, depression, 
psychological resilience, perceived social support, coping strategies, 
subjective social/school status, screen time, and sleep quality with suitable 
psychological scales. We chose four widely used classification models-k-nearest 
neighbors, logistic regression, gradient-boosted decision tree (GBDT), and a 
combination of the GBDT and LR (GBDT + LR)-to construct machine learning models, 
and we utilized the Shapley additive explanations value (SHAP) to measure how 
the features affected the dependent variables. The area under the curve (AUC) of 
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves was used to evaluate the 
performance of the models. Results: The current rates of occurrence of symptoms 
of anxiety and depression were 28.3 and 30.8% among the participants. The 
descriptive and univariate analyses showed that all of the factors included were 
statistically related to mood disorders. Among the four machine learning 
algorithms, the GBDT+LR algorithm achieved the best performance for anxiety and 
depression with average AUC values of 0.819 and 0.857. We found that the poor 
sleep quality was the most significant risk factor for mood disorders among 
Chinese adolescents. In addition, according to the feature importance (SHAP) of 
the psychological factors, we proposed a five-step mental health education 
strategy to be used during the COVID-19 pandemic (sleep 
quality-resilience-coping strategy-social support-perceived social status). 
Conclusion: In this study, we performed a cross-sectional investigation to 
examine the psychological impact of COVID-19 on adolescents. We applied machine 
learning algorithms to quantify the importance of each factor. In addition, we 
proposed a five-step mental health education strategy for school psychologists.
329
Erratum in
330
AgeTech involves the use of emerging technologies to support the health, 
331
OBJECTIVE: Biases within probabilistic electronic phenotyping algorithms are 
largely unexplored. In this work, we characterize differences in subgroup 
performance of phenotyping algorithms for Alzheimer's disease and related 
dementias (ADRD) in older adults.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We created an experimental framework to characterize the 
performance of probabilistic phenotyping algorithms under different racial 
distributions allowing us to identify which algorithms may have differential 
performance, by how much, and under what conditions. We relied on rule-based 
phenotype definitions as reference to evaluate probabilistic phenotype 
algorithms created using the Automated PHenotype Routine for Observational 
Definition, Identification, Training and Evaluation framework.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that some algorithms have performance variations 
anywhere from 3% to 30% for different populations, even when not using race as 
an input variable. We show that while performance differences in subgroups are 
not present for all phenotypes, they do affect some phenotypes and groups more 
disproportionately than others.
DISCUSSION: Our analysis establishes the need for a robust evaluation framework 
for subgroup differences. The underlying patient populations for the algorithms 
showing subgroup performance differences have great variance between model 
features when compared with the phenotypes with little to no differences.
CONCLUSION: We have created a framework to identify systematic differences in 
the performance of probabilistic phenotyping algorithms specifically in the 
context of ADRD as a use case. Differences in subgroup performance of 
probabilistic phenotyping algorithms are not widespread nor do they occur 
consistently. This highlights the great need for careful ongoing monitoring to 
evaluate, measure, and try to mitigate such differences.
American Medical Informatics Association.
332
OBJECTIVE: The long-term effects of traumatic brain injury (TBI) can resemble 
observed in normal ageing, suggesting that TBI may accelerate the ageing 
process. We investigate this using a neuroimaging model that predicts brain age 
in healthy individuals and then apply it to TBI patients. We define individuals' 
differences in chronological and predicted structural "brain age," and test 
whether TBI produces progressive atrophy and how this relates to cognitive 
function.
METHODS: A predictive model of normal ageing was defined using machine learning 
in 1,537 healthy individuals, based on magnetic resonance imaging-derived 
estimates of gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM). This ageing model was then 
applied to test 99 TBI patients and 113 healthy controls to estimate brain age.
RESULTS: The initial model accurately predicted age in healthy individuals 
(r = 0.92). TBI brains were estimated to be "older," with a mean predicted age 
difference (PAD) between chronological and estimated brain age of 4.66 years 
(±10.8) for GM and 5.97 years (±11.22) for WM. This PAD predicted cognitive 
impairment and correlated strongly with the time since TBI, indicating that 
brain tissue loss increases throughout the chronic postinjury phase.
INTERPRETATION: TBI patients' brains were estimated to be older than their 
chronological age. This discrepancy increases with time since injury, suggesting 
that TBI accelerates the rate of brain atrophy. This may be an important factor 
in the increased susceptibility in TBI patients for dementia and other 
age-associated conditions, motivating further research into the age-like effects 
of brain injury and other neurological diseases.
behalf of American Neurological Association.
333
INTRODUCTION: Polypharmacy is a growing problem in the United States. The use of 
multiple medications increases the likelihood that a patient will experience 
potential drug interactions and adverse drug reactions (ADRs). Those individuals 
with dementia or Alzheimer's disease (AD) are at greater risk, due to age, 
comorbidities, and an increased likelihood of being on a greater number of 
neuroactive medications.
METHODS: uMETHOD Health (uMH) has developed a precision medicine platform to 
address dementia and mild AD through the creation of personalized, multidomain 
treatment plans. Many interactions and ADRs may be observed, such as drug-drug 
interactions (DDIs), drug-gene interactions (DGIs), anticholinergic cognitive 
burden (ACB), and depression-inducing drugs (DIDs). uMH's algorithms can parse 
these interactions, rate them based on input from open-source databases, and 
then record all these interactions in a generated treatment plan. A total of 295 
individuals aged 65 and older were included in this analysis.
RESULTS: Of 295 individuals, 97.59% were on at least one medication, with an 
overall mean of 11.5 medications per person; 83.66% were on five or more 
medications. A total of 102 DGIs, 3642 DDIs, and one high-priority DDI were 
found in this population. There was a significant increase in the number of DDIs 
as medications per person increased (P value < 0.0001). Of the population, 
65.86% were on one or more anticholinergic drugs. There was a significant 
difference in the ACB score between individuals with cognitive decline and those 
without. In total, 60.98% of the overall population were on DIDs, with a mean of 
1.19 medications per person.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this work show that older populations have a high 
medication burden. With the growing elderly and AD populations, medication 
management for polypharmacy is a need that grows direr every year. uMH's 
platform was able to identify a multitude of polypharmacy problems that 
individuals are currently facing.
FUNDING: uMETHOD Health.
334
Cognitive screening is often a first step to document cognitive status of 
patients suspected having Alzheimer's disease (AD). Unfortunately, screening 
neuropsychological tests are often insensitivity in the detection. The goal of 
this study was to develop a simple and sensitive screening neuropsychological 
test to facilitate early detection of AD. This study recruited 761 elderly 
individuals suspected of having AD and presenting various cognitive statuses 
(mean age: 77.69 ± 8.45 years; proportion of females: 65%; cognitively 
unimpaired, CU, n = 133; mild cognitive impairment, MCI, n = 231; dementia of 
Alzheimer's type, DAT, n = 397). This study developed a novel screening 
neuropsychological test incorporating assessments of the core memory deficits 
typical of early AD and an interview on memory function with an informant. The 
proposed History-based Artificial Intelligence-Show Chwan Assessment of 
Cognition (HAI-SAC) was assessed in terms of psychometric properties, test time, 
and discriminative ability. The results were compared with those obtained using 
other common screening tests, including Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument 
(CASI), Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), and an extracted Mini-Mental State 
Examination score from CASI. HAI-SAC demonstrated acceptable internal 
consistency. Factor analysis revealed two factors: memory (semantic and 
contextual) and cognition-related information from informants. The assessment 
performance of HAI-SAC was strongly correlated with that of the common screening 
neuropsychological tests addressed in this study. HAI-SAC outperformed the other 
tests in differentiating CU individuals from patients with MCI (sensitivity: 
0.87; specificity: 0.58; area under the curve [AUC]: 0.78) or DAT (sensitivity: 
0.99; specificity: 0.89; AUC: 0.98). Performance of HAI-SAC on differentiating 
MCI from DAT was on par with performances of other tests (sensitivity: 0.78; 
specificity: 0.84; AUC: 0.87), while the test time was less than one quarter 
that of CASI and half that of MoCA. HAI-SAC is psychometrically sound, 
cost-effective, and sensitive in discriminating the cognitive status of AD.
335
AIMS: Medication cessation and service disengagement often precedes relapse in 
people with severe mental illnesses but currently specialist mental health 
services only become involved after a relapse. Early detection of non-adherence 
is needed to enable intervention to avert relapse. This paper aims to 
demonstrate how digitally automated non-adherence risk monitoring from Medicare 
data with active follow-up can work and perform in practice in a real-world 
mental health service setting.
METHODS: AI2 software is an automated risk monitoring tool to detect 
non-adherence using Medicare data. It was implemented prospectively in a cohort 
of 354 registered patients of a community mental health clinic between July 2019 
and February 2020. Patients flagged as at risk by the software were reviewed by 
two clinicians. We describe the risks automatically flagged for non-adherence 
and the clinical responses. We examine differences in clinical and demographic 
factors in patients flagged at increased risk of non-adherence.
RESULTS: In total, 46.7% (142/304) were flagged by the software as at risk of 
non-adherence, and 22% (31/142) received an intervention following clinician 
review of their case notes. Patients flagged by the software were older in age 
and had more prior mental health treatment episodes. More alerts were associated 
with patients who had been transferred from the mental health service to the 
care of their general practitioners, and those with more alerts were more likely 
to receive a follow-up intervention.
CONCLUSION: Digitally automated monitoring for non-adherence risk is feasible 
and can be integrated into clinical workflows in community psychiatric and 
primary care settings. The technology may assist clinicians and services to 
detect non-adherence behaviour early, thereby triggering interventions that have 
the potential to reduce rates of mental health deterioration and acute illness 
relapse.
336
BACKGROUND: There is a need for a reliable, easy-to-use, widely available, and 
validated tool for timely cognitive impairment identification. We created a 
computerized cognitive screening tool (Santé-Cerveau digital tool (SCD-T)) 
including validated questionnaires and the following neuropsychological tests: 5 
Word Test (5-WT) for episodic memory, Trail Making Test (TMT) for executive 
functions, and a number coding test (NCT) adapted from the Digit Symbol 
Substitution Test for global intellectual efficiency. This study aimed to 
evaluate the performance of SCD-T to identify cognitive deficit and to determine 
its usability.
METHODS: Three groups were constituted including 65 elderly Controls, 64 
patients with neurodegenerative diseases (NDG): 50 AD and 14 non-AD, and 20 
post-COVID-19 patients. The minimum MMSE score for inclusion was 20. Association 
between computerized SCD-T cognitive tests and their standard equivalent was 
assessed using Pearson's correlation coefficients. Two algorithms (a simple 
clinician-guided algorithm involving the 5-WT and the NCT; and a machine 
learning classifier based on 8 scores from the SCD-T tests extracted from a 
multiple logistic regression model, and data from the SCD-T questionnaires) were 
evaluated. The acceptability of SCD-T was investigated through a questionnaire 
and scale.
RESULTS: AD and non-AD participants were older (mean ± standard deviation (SD): 
72.61 ± 6.79 vs 69.91 ± 4.86 years old, p = 0.011) and had a lower MMSE score 
(Mean difference estimate ± standard error: 1.74 ± 0.14, p < 0.001) than 
Controls; post-COVID-19 patients were younger than Controls (mean ± SD: 
45.07 ± 11.36 years old, p < 0.001). All the computerized SCD-T cognitive tests 
were significantly associated with their reference version. In the pooled 
Controls and NDG group, the correlation coefficient was 0.84 for verbal memory, 
-0.60 for executive functions, and 0.72 for global intellectual efficiency. The 
clinician-guided algorithm demonstrated 94.4% ± 3.8% sensitivity and 
80.5% ± 8.7% specificity, and the machine learning classifier 96.8% ± 3.9% 
sensitivity and 90.7% ± 5.8% specificity. The acceptability of SCD-T was good to 
excellent.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate the high accuracy of SCD-T in screening cognitive 
disorders and its good acceptance even in individuals with prodromal and mild 
dementia stages. SCD-T would be useful in primary care to faster refer subjects 
with significant cognitive impairment (and limit unnecessary referrals) to 
specialized consultation, improve the AD care pathway and the pre-screening in 
clinical trials.
337
BACKGROUND: The clinical dementia rating (CDR) scale is commonly used to 
diagnose dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD). The sum of boxes of the CDR 
(CDR-SB) has recently been emphasized and applied to interventional trials for 
tracing the progression of cognitive impairment (CI) in the early stages of AD. 
We aimed to study the influence of baseline CDR-SB on disease progression to 
dementia or reversion to normal cognition (NC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The baseline CDR < 1 cohort registered from September 
2015 to August 2020 with longitudinal follow-up in the History-based Artificial 
Intelligence Clinical Dementia Diagnostic System (HAICDDS) database was 
retrospectively analyzed for the rates of conversion to CDR ≥ 1. A Cox 
regression model was applied to study the influence of CDR-SB levels on 
progression, adjusting for age, education, sex, neuropsychological tests, 
neuropsychiatric symptoms, parkinsonism, and multiple vascular risk factors.
RESULTS: A total of 1,827 participants were analyzed, including 1,258 (68.9%) 
non-converters, and 569 (31.1%) converters with mean follow-up of 2.1 (range 
0.4-5.5) and 1.8 (range 0.3-5.0) years, respectively. Conversion rates increased 
with increasing CDR-SB scores. Compared to a CDR-SB score of 0, the hazard 
ratios (HR) for conversion to dementia were 1.51, 1.91, 2.58, 2.13, 3.46, 3.85, 
3.19, 5.12, and 5.22 for CDR-SB scores of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 
4.0, and ≥4.5, respectively (all p < 0.05 except for CDR-SB score = 0.5). In 
addition, older age, lower education, lower cognitive performance, and a history 
of diabetes also increased conversion rates. Furthermore, reversions to NC were 
12.5, 5.6, 0.9, and 0% for CDR-SB scores of 0.5, 1.0-2.0, 2.5-3.5 and ≥4.0, 
respectively (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: CDR-SB in predementia or very mild dementia (VMD) stages highly 
predicts progression to dementia or reversion to NC. Therefore, CDR-SB could be 
a good candidate for tracing the effectiveness of pharmacological and 
non-pharmacological interventions in populations without dementia.
338
OBJECTIVE: To examine the predictive attributes for accidental falls in 
community-dwelling older people in Hong Kong using decision tree analysis.
METHODS: We recruited 1151 participants with an average age of 74.8 years by 
convenience sampling from a primary healthcare setting to carry out the 
cross-sectional study over 6 months. The whole dataset was divided into two 
sets, namely training set and test set, which respectively occupied 70% and 30% 
of the whole dataset. The training dataset was used first; decision tree 
analysis was used to identify possible stratifying variables that could help to 
generate separate decision models.
RESULTS: The number of fallers was 230 with 20% 1-year prevalence. There were 
significant differences in gender, use of walking aids, presence of chronic 
diseases, and co-morbidities including osteoporosis, depression, and previous 
upper limb fractures, and performance in the Timed Up and Go test and the 
Functional Reach test among the baselines between the faller and non-faller 
groups. Three decision tree models for the dependent dichotomous variables 
(fallers, indoor fallers, and outdoor fallers) were generated, with overall 
accuracy rates of the models of 77.40%, 89.44% and 85.76%, respectively. Timed 
Up and Go, Functional Reach, body mass index, high blood pressure, osteoporosis, 
and number of drugs taken were identified as stratifying variables in the 
decision tree models for fall screening.
CONCLUSION: The use of decision tree analysis for clinical algorithms for 
accidental falls in community-dwelling older people creates patterns for 
decision-making in fall screening, which also paves the way for utility-based 
decision-making using supervised machine learning in fall risk detection.
339
OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to identify clusters of adult onset 
epilepsy with distinct comorbidities and risks of early and late death.
METHODS: This was a retrospective open cohort study that included all adults 
meeting a case definition for epilepsy after the Acceptable Mortality Recording 
date in the Health Improvement Network database for the years 2000-2012 
inclusive. Unsupervised agglomerative hierarchical clustering was performed to 
identify unique clusters of patients based on their predicted risk of early 
(<4 years of epilepsy diagnosis) and late (≥4 years from diagnosis) mortality 
and patient-level clinical characteristics.
RESULTS: We identified 10 499 presumed incident cases of epilepsy from 11 194 
182 patients. Four phenotypic clusters were identified in the early and late 
risk periods. Early clusters include older adults with cardiovascular disease 
and a high risk of death (median predicted risk = 20%, interquartile range [IQR] 
= 9%-31%), a group with moderate risk of death and cancer (median predicted risk 
= 6%, IQR = 2%-15%), a group with psychiatric disease/substance use and few 
somatic comorbidities (median predicted risk = 5%, IQR = 2%-9%), and one with a 
younger age at onset and few comorbidities (median predicted risk = 4%, IQR = 
1%-11%). There was minimal movement of individuals between clusters for those 
surviving the early risk period. Age- and sex-standardized 3-year mortality 
ratios were more than sixfold higher than the general population for every 
cluster, even those primarily comprised of healthy younger adults.
SIGNIFICANCE: Adult onset epilepsy is marked by unique clusters of comorbid 
conditions and elevated risks of death that form discrete populations for 
targeted therapeutic interventions. These clusters remain relatively stable 
between the early and late mortality risk periods. Of particular interest are 
the clusters marked by young and otherwise healthy adults whose standardized 
mortality ratio is sixfold higher than general population despite few 
conventional risk factors for premature death.
340
Falls are a major cause of injuries and deaths in older adults. Even when no 
injury occurs, about half of all older adults who fall are unable to get up 
without assistance. The extended period of lying on the floor often leads to 
medical complications, including muscle damage, dehydration, anxiety and fear of 
falling. Wearable sensor systems incorporating accelerometers and/or gyroscopes 
are designed to prevent long lies by automatically detecting and alerting care 
providers to the occurrence of a fall. Research groups have reported up to 100% 
accuracy in detecting falls in experimental settings. However, there is a lack 
of studies examining accuracy in the real-world setting. In this study, we 
examined the accuracy of a fall detection system based on real-world fall and 
non-fall data sets. Five young adults and 19 older adults went about their daily 
activities while wearing tri-axial accelerometers. Older adults experienced 10 
unanticipated falls during the data collection. Approximately 400 hours of 
activities of daily living were recorded. We employed a machine learning 
algorithm, Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier, to identify falls and 
non-fall events. We found that our system was able to detect 8 out of the 10 
falls in older adults using signals from a single accelerometer (waist or 
sternum). Furthermore, our system did not report any false alarm during 
approximately 28.5 hours of recorded data from young adults. However, with older 
adults, the false positive rate among individuals ranged from 0 to 0.3 false 
alarms per hour. While our system showed higher fall detection and substantially 
lower false positive rate than the existing fall detection systems, there is a 
need for continuous efforts to collect real-world data within the target 
population to perform fall validation studies for fall detection systems on 
bigger real-world fall and non-fall datasets.
341
PURPOSE: Our aim was to develop and validate a practical US healthcare claims 
algorithm for identifying incident lung cancer that improves on positive 
predictive value (PPV) and sensitivity observed in past studies.
METHODS: Patients newly diagnosed with lung cancer in Surveillance, 
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) (gold standard) were linked with Medicare 
claims. A 5% Medicare "other cancer" sample and noncancer sample served as 
controls. A split-sample validation approach was used. Rules-based, regression, 
and machine learning models for developing algorithms were explored. Algorithms 
were developed in the model building subset. Rules-based algorithms and those 
with the highest F scores were evaluated in the validation subset. F scores were 
compared for 1000 bootstrap samples. Misclassification was evaluated by 
calculating the odds of selection by the algorithm among true positives and true 
negatives.
RESULTS: A practical single-score algorithm derived from a logistic regression 
model had sensitivity = 78.22% and PPV = 78.50% (F score: 78.36). The algorithm 
was most likely to misclassify older patients (ages ≥80 years) or with missing 
data in the SEER registry, shorter follow-up time in Medicare (<3 months), 
insurance through Veterans Affairs, >1 cancer in SEER, or certain Charlson 
comorbidities (dementia, chronic pulmonary disease, liver disease, or myocardial 
infarction).
CONCLUSION: In this dataset, a practical point-based algorithm for identifying 
incident lung cancer demonstrated significant and substantial improvement (7.9% 
and 23.9% absolute improvement in sensitivity and PPV, respectively) compared 
with a current standard.
342
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common and most costly chronic 
neurodegenerative disease globally. AD develops over an extended period prior to 
cognitive symptoms, leaving a "window of opportunity" for targeted 
risk-reduction interventions. Further, this pre-dementia phase includes early 
physiological changes in sleep and autonomic regulation, for which wearable 
biosensor devices may offer a convenient and cost-effective method to assess 
AD-risk.
METHODS: Patients with a family history of AD and no or minimal cognitive 
complaints were recruited from the Alzheimer's Prevention Clinic at Weill 
Cornell Medicine and New York-Presbyterian. Of the 40 consecutive patients 
screened, 34 (85%) agreed to wear a wearable biosensor device (WHOOP). One 
subject (2.5%) lost the device prior to data collection. Of the remaining 
subjects, 24 were classified as normal cognition and were asymptomatic, 6 were 
classified as subjective cognitive decline, and 3 were amyloid-positive (one 
with pre-clinical AD, one with pre-clinical Lewy-Body Dementia, and one with 
mild cognitive impairment due to AD). Sleep-cycle, autonomic (heart rate 
variability [HRV]) and activity measures were collected via WHOOP. Blood 
biomarkers and neuropsychological testing sensitive to cognitive changes in 
pre-clinical AD were obtained. Participants completed surveys assessing their 
sleep-patterns, exercise habits, and attitudes towards WHOOP. The goal of this 
prospective observational study was to determine the feasibility of using a 
wrist-worn biosensor device in patients at-risk for AD dementia. Unsupervised 
machine learning was performed to first separate participants into distinct 
phenotypic groups using the multivariate biometric data. Additional statistical 
analyses were conducted to examine correlations between individual biometric 
measures and cognitive performance.
RESULTS: 27 (81.8%) participants completed the follow-up surveys. Twenty-four 
participants (88.9%) were satisfied with WHOOP after six months, and 
twenty-three (85.2%) wanted to continue wearing WHOOP. K-means clustering 
separated participants into two groups. Group 1 was older, had lower HRV, and 
spent more time in slow-wave sleep (SWS) than Group 2. Group 1 performed better 
on two cognitive tests assessing executive function: Flanker Inhibitory 
Attention/Control (FIAC) (p=.031), and Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS) 
(p=.061). In Group 1, DCCS was correlated with SWS (ρ=.68, p=0.024) and HRV 
(ρ=.6, p=0.019). In Group 2, DCCS was correlated with HRV (ρ=.55, p=0.018). 
There were no significant differences in blood biomarkers between the two 
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Wearable biosensor devices may be a feasible tool to assess 
AD-related physiological changes. Longitudinal collection of sleep and HRV data 
may potentially be a non-invasive method for monitoring cognitive changes 
related to pre-clinical AD. Further study is warranted in larger populations.
343
Previous studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of intelligent tutoring 
systems (ITS) in facilitating English learning. However, no empirical research 
has been conducted on secondary students' intention to use ITSs in the language 
domain. This study proposes an extended technology acceptance model (TAM) to 
predict secondary students' continuance intention to use and actual use of ITSs 
for English learning. The model included fifteen hypotheses that were tested 
with 528 senior secondary students in China. The results of structural equation 
modeling showed that (1) perceived usefulness and price value had direct 
positive impacts on continuance intention; (2) perceived ease of use was not 
directly associated with students' intention but indirectly influenced intention 
via perceived usefulness; (3) through the mediation of perceptions, learning 
goal orientation and facilitating conditions were positively associated with 
continuance intention; (4) perceived enjoyment positively predicted and anxiety 
negatively predicted students' intention to use ITSs; and (5) students' 
continuance intention to use ITSs was significantly positively associated with 
their actual use of ITSs for English learning. The model showed strong 
explanatory power and might be implemented in future research. This study 
contributes to the theory and practice of ITSs in K-12 education.
LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022, Springer Nature or its licensor holds 
344
Older people are increasingly dependent on others to support their daily 
activities due to geriatric symptoms such as dementia. Some of them stay in 
long-term care facilities. Elderly people with night wandering behaviour may 
lose their way, leading to a significant risk of injuries. The eNightLog system 
was developed to monitor the night-time bedside activities of older people in 
order to help them cope with this issue. It comprises a 3D time-of-flight 
near-infrared sensor and an ultra-wideband sensor for detecting human presence 
and to determine postures without a video camera. A threshold-based algorithm 
was developed to classify different activities, such as leaving the bed. The 
system is able to send alarm messages to caregivers if an elderly user performs 
undesirable activities. In this study, 17 sets of eNightLog systems were 
installed in an elderly hostel with 17 beds in 9 bedrooms. During the 
three-month field test, 26 older people with different periods of stay were 
included in the study. The accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of detecting 
non-assisted bed-leaving events was 99.8%, 100%, and 99.6%, respectively. There 
were only three false alarms out of 2762 bed-exiting events. Our results 
demonstrated that the eNightLog system is sufficiently accurate to be applied in 
the hostel environment. Machine learning with instance segmentation and online 
learning will enable the system to be used for widely different environments and 
people, with improvements to be made in future studies.
345
White matter hyperintensities (WMH) are frequently observed in brain scans of 
elderly people. They are associated with an increased risk of stroke, cognitive 
decline, and dementia. However, it is unknown yet if measures of WMH provide 
information that improve the understanding of poststroke outcome compared to 
only state-of-the-art stereotaxic structural lesion data. We implemented 
high-dimensional machine learning models, based on support vector regression, to 
predict the severity of spatial neglect in 103 acute right hemispheric stroke 
patients. We found that (1) the additional information of right hemispheric or 
bilateral voxel-based topographic WMH extent indeed yielded a significant 
improvement in predicting acute neglect severity (compared to the voxel-based 
stroke lesion map alone). (2) Periventricular WMH appeared more relevant for 
prediction than deep subcortical WMH. (3) Among different measures of WMH, 
voxel-based maps as measures of topographic extent allowed more accurate 
predictions compared to the use of traditional ordinally assessed visual rating 
scales (Fazekas-scale, Cardiovascular Health Study-scale). In summary, 
topographic WMH appear to be a valuable clinical imaging biomarker for 
predicting the severity of cognitive deficits and bears great potential for 
rehabilitation guidance of acute stroke patients.
346
INTRODUCTION: Our goal was to determine if features of surgical patients, easily 
obtained from the medical chart or brief interview, could be used to predict 
those likely to experience more rapid cognitive decline following surgery.
METHODS: We analyzed data from an observational study of 560 older adults (≥70 
years) without dementia undergoing major elective non-cardiac surgery. Cognitive 
decline was measured using change in a global composite over 2 to 36 months 
following surgery. Predictive features were identified as variables readily 
obtained from chart review or a brief patient assessment. We developed 
predictive models for cognitive decline (slope) and predicting dichotomized 
cognitive decline at a clinically determined cut.
RESULTS: In a hold-out testing set, the regularized regression predictive model 
achieved a root mean squared error (RMSE) of 0.146 and a model r-square (R2 ) of 
.31. Prediction of "rapid" decliners as a group achieved an area under the curve 
(AUC) of .75.
CONCLUSION: Some of our models could predict persons with increased risk for 
accelerated cognitive decline with greater accuracy than relying upon chance, 
and this result might be useful for stratification of surgical patients for 
inclusion in future clinical trials.
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
347
BACKGROUND: Various types of dementia and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) are 
manifested as irregularities in human speech and language, which have proven to 
be strong predictors for the disease presence and progress ion. Therefore, 
automatic speech analytics provided by a mobile application may be a useful tool 
in providing additional indicators for assessment and detection of early stage 
dementia and MCI.
METHOD: 165 participants (subjects with subjective cognitive impairment (SCI), 
MCI patients, Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mixed dementia (MD) patients) were 
recorded with a mobile application while performing several short vocal 
cognitive tasks during a regular consultation. These tasks included verbal 
fluency, picture description, counting down and a free speech task. The voice 
recordings were processed in two steps: in the first step, vocal markers were 
extracted using speech signal processing techniques; in the second, the vocal 
markers were tested to assess their 'power' to distinguish between SCI, MCI, AD 
and MD. The second step included training automatic classifiers for detecting 
MCI and AD, based on machine learning methods, and testing the detection 
accuracy.
RESULTS: The fluency and free speech tasks obtain the highest accuracy rates of 
classifying AD vs. MD vs. MCI vs. SCI. Using the data, we demonstrated 
classification accuracy as follows: SCI vs. AD = 92% accuracy; SCI vs. MD = 92% 
accuracy; SCI vs. MCI = 86% accuracy and MCI vs. AD = 86%.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate the potential value of vocal analytics and the 
use of a mobile application for accurate automatic differentiation between SCI, 
MCI and AD. This tool can provide the clinician with meaningful information for 
assessment and monitoring of people with MCI and AD based on a non-invasive, 
simple and low-cost method.
348
PURPOSE: Non-adherence/persistence to adjuvant endocrine therapy can negatively 
impact survival. Beliefs about medicines are known to affect adherence. This 
study aims to identify socio-demographic and clinical characteristics associated 
with medication beliefs among women taking aromatase inhibitors (AIs).
METHODS: Women completed an online survey on beliefs about AI therapy [Beliefs 
about Medicines Questionnaire (BMQ)], beliefs about breast cancer [Assessment of 
Survivor Concerns scale (ASC)], and depression [Personal Health Questionnaire 
depression scale (PHQ-8)]. Socio-demographic and clinical characteristics were 
collected. Bivariate analyses and linear regression models were performed to 
investigate relationships between variables.
RESULTS: A total of 224 women reported currently taking AI therapy and were 
included in the analysis. Significantly higher concern beliefs were found among 
women who had at least mild depression, experienced side effects from AIs, and 
previously stopped therapy with another AI. Significant correlations were found 
between concern and necessity beliefs and cancer and health worry. Women age 70 
and older displayed less fear of cancer recurrence and health worry, and a trend 
towards lower necessity and concern beliefs. No differences were found for other 
variables. In the regression model, greater necessity beliefs were found with 
increases in the number of current prescription medications (B = 1.06, 95% CI 
0.31-1.81, p = 0.006) and shorter duration of current AI therapy (B = -0.65, 95% 
CI -1.23 to -0.07, p = 0.029), whereas greater concern beliefs were associated 
with higher depression scores (B = 1.19, 95% CI 0.35-2.03, p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: Medication necessity and concern beliefs were associated with a 
definable subset of patients who may be at higher risk for non-persistence.
349
PURPOSE: Over coming decades, a rise in the number of short, acute 
hospitalizations of older people is to be expected. To help physicians identify 
high-risk patients prior to discharge, we aimed to develop a model capable of 
predicting the risk of 30-day mortality for older patients discharged from 
short, acute hospitalizations and to examine how model performance changed with 
an increasing amount of information.
METHODS: This registry-based study included acute hospitalizations in Denmark 
for 2016-2018 lasting ≤24 hours where patients were permanent residents, ≥65 
years old, and discharged alive. Utilizing many different predictor variables, 
we developed random forest models with an increasing amount of information, 
compared their performance, and examined important variables.
RESULTS: We included 107,132 patients with a median age of 75 years. Of these, 
3.3% (n=3575) died within 30 days of discharge. Model performance improved 
especially with the addition of laboratory results and information on prior 
acute admissions (AUROC 0.835), and again with comorbidities and number of 
prescription drugs (AUROC 0.860). Model performance did not improve with the 
addition of sociodemographic variables (AUROC 0.861), apart from age and sex. 
Important variables included age, dementia, number of prescription drugs, 
C-reactive protein, and eGFR.
CONCLUSION: The best model accurately estimated the risk of short-term mortality 
for older patients following short, acute hospitalizations. Trained on a large 
and heterogeneous dataset, the model is applicable to most acute clinical 
settings and could be a useful tool for physicians prior to discharge.
350
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to determine the frequency of select 
adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) among a sample of American Indian (AI) 
adults living with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and the associations between ACEs and 
self-rated physical and mental health. We also examined associations between 
sociocultural factors and health, including possible buffering processes.
DESIGN: Survey data for this observational study were collected using 
computer-assisted survey interviewing techniques between 2013 and 2015.
SETTING: Participants were randomly selected from AI tribal clinic facilities on 
five reservations in the upper Midwestern USA.
PARTICIPANTS: Inclusion criteria were a diagnosis of T2D, age 18 years or older 
and self-identified as AI. The sample includes n=192 adults (55.7% female; mean 
age=46.3 years).
PRIMARY MEASURES: We assessed nine ACEs related to household dysfunction and 
child maltreatment. Independent variables included social support, diabetes 
support and two cultural factors: spiritual activities and connectedness. 
Primary outcomes were self-rated physical and mental health.
RESULTS: An average of 3.05 ACEs were reported by participants and 81.9% (n=149) 
said they had experienced at least one ACE. Controlling for gender, age and 
income, ACEs were negatively associated with self-rated physical and mental 
health (p<0.05). Connectedness and social support were positively and 
significantly associated with physical and mental health. Involvement in 
spiritual activities was positively associated with mental health and 
diabetes-specific support was positively associated with physical health. Social 
support and diabetes-specific social support moderated associations between ACEs 
and physical health.
CONCLUSIONS: This research demonstrates inverse associations between ACEs and 
well-being of adult AI patients with diabetes. The findings further demonstrate 
the promise of social and cultural integration as a critical component of 
wellness, a point of relevance for all cultures. Health professionals can use 
findings from this study to augment their assessment of patients and guide them 
to health-promoting social support services and resources for cultural 
involvement.
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
351
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) in the U.S. has tripled in the prior five years, and 
injecting drug use is the primary risk for HCV, with up to 90% of older and 
former people who inject drugs (PWIDs) testing positive. Laboratory testing of 
HCV for any PWIDs is the gold standard, however many PWIDs lack access to health 
treatment or services. Identifying risks of HCV via a data science approach 
would aid community health workers (CHW) to rapidly link those most at risk of 
infection with treatment. This study employed a data-science approach to 
determine the strongest risk factors of HCV in a sample of Mexican-Americans 
WIDs n = 221 (96 negative/125 positive). Data included 238 demographic and 
psychosocial predictors. A Random Forest machine learning algorithm demonstrated 
significant prediction improvement over baseline no information rate comparison. 
Strongest risks for positive HCV included sharing drug-use equipment and younger 
age at first heroin use; receiving drug-education during incarceration was 
protective. A ROC curve fit to the prediction yielded an area under the curve of 
0.77. Predictive variables of HCV in the present analysis can be obtained via 
screening by CHW. Identification of patients most at risk of HCV within 
community settings can maximize treatment utilization.
352
Alzheimer's is a principal concern globally. Machine learning is a valuable tool 
to determine protective and diagnostic approaches for the elderly. We analyzed 
microarray datasets of Alzheimer's cases based on artificial intelligence by R 
statistical software. This study provided a screened pool of ncRNAs and coding 
RNAs related to Alzheimer's development. We designed hub genes as cut points in 
networks and predicted potential microRNAs and LncRNA to regulate protein 
networks in aging and Alzheimer's through in silico algorithms. Notably, we 
collected effective traditional herbal medicines. A list of bioactive compounds 
prepared including capsaicin, piperine, crocetin, safranal, saffron oil, 
coumarin, thujone, rosmarinic acid, sabinene, thymoquinone, ascorbic acid, 
vitamin E, cyanidin, rhaponticin, isovitexin, coumarin, nobiletin, evodiamine, 
gingerol, curcumin, quercetin, fisetin, and allicin as an effective fusion that 
potentially modulates hub proteins and molecular signaling pathways based on 
pharmacophore model screening and chemoinformatics survey. We identified 
profiles of 21 mRNAs, 272 microRNAs, and eight LncRNA in Alzheimer's based on 
prediction algorithms. We suggested a fusion of senolytic herbal ligands as an 
alternative therapy and preventive formulation in dementia. Also, we provided 
ncRNAs expression status as novel monitoring strategies in Alzheimer's and new 
cut-point proteins as novel therapeutic approaches. Synchronizing fusion drugs 
and lifestyle could reverse Alzheimer's hallmarks to amelioration via an offset 
of the signaling pathways, leading to increased life quality in the elderly.
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.
353
Artificial intelligence and decision support systems offer a plethora of health 
monitoring capabilities in ambient assisted living environment. Continuous 
assessment of health indicators for elderly people living on their own is of 
utmost importance, so as to prolong their independence and quality of life. Slow 
varying, long-term deteriorating health trends are not easily identifiable in 
seniors. Thus, early sign detection of a specific condition, as well as, any 
likely transition from a healthy state to a pathological one are key problems 
that the herein proposed framework aims at resolving. Statistical process 
control concepts offer a personalized approach toward identification of trends 
that are away from the atypical behavior or state of the seniors, while fuzzy 
cognitive maps knowledge representation and inference schema have proved to be 
efficient in terms of disease classification. Geriatric depression is used as a 
case study throughout the paper, so to prove the validity of the framework, 
which is planned to be pilot tested with a series of lone-living seniors in 
their own homes.
354
BACKGROUND: The prevalence of headache disorders, migraine, chronic daily 
headache (CDH), and medication-overuse headache (MOH) among the elderly in Japan 
has not been sufficiently investigated. We performed a questionnaire-based 
survey and revealed 3-month headache prevalence and headaches' characteristics.
METHODS: The population aged over 64 was investigated in Itoigawa during their 
third coronavirus disease 2019 vaccination. Migraine, MOH was defined as The 
International Classification of Headache Disorders Third edition. CDH was 
defined as a headache occurring at least 15 days per month. K-means++ were used 
to perform clustering.
RESULTS: Among 2858 valid responses, headache disorders, migraine, CDH, and MOH 
prevalence was 11.97%, 0.91%, 1.57%, and 0.70%, respectively. Combined-analgesic 
and non-opioid analgesic were widely used. Only one migraineur used prophylactic 
medication. We performed k-means++ to group the 332 MOH patients into four 
clusters. Cluster 1 seemed to have tension-type headache-like headache 
characteristics, cluster 2 seemed to have MOH-like headache characteristics, 
cluster 3 seemed to have severe headaches with comorbidities such as 
dyslipidemia, stroke, and depression, and cluster 4 seemed to have migraine-like 
headache characteristics with photophobia and phonophobia.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the largest prevalence survey in the Japanese elderly. 
Headache disorders are still the elderly's burden. Clustering suggested that 
severe headaches associated with some comorbidities may be unique to the 
elderly.
355
BACKGROUND: Intelligent assistants (IAs), also known as intelligent agents, use 
artificial intelligence to help users achieve a goal or complete a task. IAs 
represent a potential solution for providing older adults with individualized 
assistance at home, for example, to reduce social isolation, serve as memory 
aids, or help with disease management. However, to design IAs for health that 
are beneficial and accepted by older adults, it is important to understand their 
beliefs about IAs, how they would like to interact with IAs for consumer health, 
and how they desire to integrate IAs into their homes.
OBJECTIVE: We explore older adults' mental models and beliefs about IAs, the 
tasks they want IAs to support, and how they would like to interact with IAs for 
consumer health. For the purpose of this study, we focus on IAs in the context 
of consumer health information management and search.
METHODS: We present findings from an exploratory, qualitative study that 
investigated older adults' perspectives of IAs that aid with consumer health 
information search and management tasks. Eighteen older adults participated in a 
multiphase, participatory design workshop in which we engaged them in 
discussion, brainstorming, and design activities that helped us identify their 
current challenges managing and finding health information at home. We also 
explored their beliefs and ideas for an IA to assist them with consumer health 
tasks. We used participatory design activities to identify areas in which they 
felt IAs might be useful, but also to uncover the reasoning behind the ideas 
they presented. Discussions were audio-recorded and later transcribed. We 
compiled design artifacts collected during the study to supplement researcher 
transcripts and notes. Thematic analysis was used to analyze data.
RESULTS: We found that participants saw IAs as potentially useful for providing 
recommendations, facilitating collaboration between themselves and other 
caregivers, and for alerts of serious illness. However, they also desired 
familiar and natural interactions with IAs (eg, using voice) that could, if need 
be, provide fluid and unconstrained interactions, reason about their symptoms, 
and provide information or advice. Other participants discussed the need for 
flexible IAs that could be used by those with low technical resources or skills.
CONCLUSIONS: From our findings, we present a discussion of three key components 
of participants' mental models, including the people, behaviors, and 
interactions they described that were important for IAs for consumer health 
information management and seeking. We then discuss the role of access, 
transparency, caregivers, and autonomy in design for addressing participants' 
concerns about privacy and trust as well as its role in assisting others that 
may interact with an IA on the older adults' behalf.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): RR2-10.1145/3240925.3240972.
JMIR Aging (http://aging.jmir.org), 11.12.2019.
356
Driving cessation is a common transition experienced by aging adults that 
confers both a symbolic and literal loss of independence due to the central role 
of automobiles for mobility in the US. Prior research has shown that driving 
cessation has negative implications for mental health, social participation, and 
access to healthcare. Given these sequelae of driving cessation and prior work 
showing that late-life transitions related to independence (e.g., transitioning 
into residential care) are associated with suicide, we sought to estimate the 
frequency of driving cessation associated suicide. Data include suicide (n = 
59,080) and undetermined (n = 6,862) deaths aged ≥55 from the National Violent 
Death Reporting System (NVDRS, 2003-2017). Each case in the NVDRS has both 
quantitative data (e.g., demographic characteristics) and qualitative text 
narratives, derived from coroner/medical examiner reports, which describe the 
most salient circumstances and features of each death. To identify cases 
associated with driving cessation, we employed a supervised random forest 
algorithm to develop a Natural Language Processing (NLP) classifier. Identified 
driving cessation associated cases were then categorized and characterized using 
descriptive statistics and qualitative content analysis. From 2003 to 2017, 
there were an estimated 305 cases of suicide/undetermined deaths associated with 
driving cessation in the NVDRS, representing 0.04% of all cases. Cases 
associated with driving cessation were older, more likely to be male, more 
likely to have a physical health problem, more likely to have experienced a 
recent crisis, and more likely to have lived in a rural county than other 
decedents. Qualitative analysis identified functional impairment, 
alcohol-related driving limitations, loss of employment, and recent car 
accidents as common themes among cases associated with driving cessation. This 
analysis illustrates the utility of NLP in identifying novel correlates of 
suicide in later life. Although driving cessation associated suicide is a rare 
outcome, further research is warranted on understanding the conditions under 
which driving cessation is associated with suicidal behavior, and how to support 
the well-being of aging adults during these types of major life transitions.
357
Barriers to healthcare access are widespread in elderly populations, with a 
major consequence that older people are not benefiting from the latest 
technologies to diagnose disease. Recent advances in the automated analysis of 
speech show promising results in the identification of cognitive decline 
associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD), as well as its purported pre-clinical 
stage. We utilized automated methods to analyze speech recorded over the 
telephone in 91 community-dwelling older adults diagnosed with mild AD, amnestic 
mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) or cognitively healthy. We asked whether 
natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning could more accurately 
identify groups than traditional screening tools and be sensitive to subtle 
differences in speech between the groups. Despite variable recording quality, 
NLP methods differentiated the three groups with greater accuracy than two 
traditional dementia screeners and a clinician who read transcripts of their 
speech. Imperfect speech data collected via a telephone is of sufficient quality 
to be examined with the latest speech technologies. Critically, these data 
reveal significant differences in speech that closely match the clinical 
diagnoses of AD, aMCI and healthy control.
358
INTRODUCTION: Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are common infections for which 
initial antibiotic treatment decisions are empirically based, often without 
antibiotic susceptibility testing to evaluate resistance, increasing the risk of 
inappropriate therapy. We hypothesized that models based on electronic health 
records (EHR) could assist in the identification of patients at higher risk for 
antibiotic-resistant UTIs and help guide the selection of antimicrobials in 
hospital and clinic settings.
METHODS: EHR from multiple centers in North-Central Florida, including patient 
demographics, previous diagnoses, prescriptions, and antibiotic susceptibility 
tests, were obtained for 9990 patients diagnosed with a UTI during 2011-2019. 
Decision trees, boosted logistic regression (BLR), and random forest models were 
developed to predict resistance to common antibiotics used for UTI management 
[sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (SXT), nitrofurantoin (NIT), ciprofloxacin (CIP)] 
and multidrug resistance (MDR).
RESULTS: There were 6307 (63.1%) individuals with a UTI caused by a resistant 
microorganism. Overall, the population was majority female, white, non-Hispanic, 
and older aged (mean = 60.7 years). The BLR models yielded the highest 
discriminative ability, as measured by the out-of-bag area under the 
receiver-operating curve (AUROC), for the resistance outcomes [AUROC = 0.58 
(SXT), 0.62 (NIT), 0.64 (CIP), and 0.66 (MDR)]. Variables in the best performing 
model were sex, history of UTIs, catheterization, renal disease, dementia, 
hemiplegia/paraplegia, and hypertension.
CONCLUSIONS: The discriminative ability of the prediction models was moderate. 
Nonetheless, these models based solely on EHR demonstrate utility for the 
identification of patients at higher risk for resistant infections. These 
models, in turn, may help guide clinical decision-making on the ordering of 
urine cultures and decisions regarding empiric therapy for these patients.
359
BACKGROUND: Older adults with late-life depression (LLD) often experience 
incomplete or lack of response to first-line pharmacotherapy. The treatment of 
LLD could be improved using objective biological measures to predict response. 
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) can be used to measure cortical 
excitability, inhibition, and plasticity, which have been implicated in LLD 
pathophysiology and associated with brain stimulation treatment outcomes in 
younger adults with depression. TMS measures have not yet been investigated as 
predictors of treatment outcomes in LLD or pharmacotherapy outcomes in adults of 
any age with depression.
METHODS: We assessed whether pretreatment single-pulse and paired-pulse TMS 
measures, combined with clinical and demographic measures, predict venlafaxine 
treatment response in 76 outpatients with LLD. We compared the predictive 
performance of machine learning models including or excluding TMS predictors.
RESULTS: Two single-pulse TMS measures predicted venlafaxine response: cortical 
excitability (neuronal membrane excitability) and the variability of cortical 
excitability (dynamic fluctuations in excitability levels). In cross-validation, 
models using a combination of these TMS predictors, clinical markers of 
treatment resistance, and age classified patients with 73% ± 11% balanced 
accuracy (average correct classification rate of responders and nonresponders; 
permutation testing, p < .005); these models significantly outperformed 
(corrected t test, p = .025) models using clinical and demographic predictors 
alone (60% ± 10% balanced accuracy).
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary findings suggest that single-pulse TMS measures 
of cortical excitability may be useful predictors of response to pharmacotherapy 
in LLD. Future studies are needed to confirm these findings and determine 
whether combining TMS predictors with other biomarkers further improves the 
accuracy of predicting LLD treatment outcome.
360
AIMS: Likelihood of alcohol dependence (AD) is increased among people who 
transition to greater levels of alcohol involvement at a younger age. Indicated 
interventions delivered early may be effective in reducing risk, but could be 
costly. One way to increase cost-effectiveness would be to develop a prediction 
model that targeted interventions to the subset of youth with early alcohol use 
who are at highest risk of subsequent AD.
DESIGN: A prediction model was developed for DSM-IV AD onset by age 25 years 
using an ensemble machine-learning algorithm known as 'Super Learner'. Shapley 
additive explanations (SHAP) assessed variable importance.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Respondents reporting early onset of regular alcohol 
use (i.e. by 17 years of age) who were aged 25 years or older at interview from 
14 representative community surveys conducted in 13 countries as part of WHO's 
World Mental Health Surveys.
MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome to be predicted was onset of life-time DSM-IV 
AD by age 25 as measured using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview, 
a fully structured diagnostic interview.
FINDINGS: AD prevalence by age 25 was 5.1% among the 10 687 individuals who 
reported drinking alcohol regularly by age 17. The prediction model achieved an 
external area under the curve [0.78; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.74-0.81] 
higher than any individual candidate risk model (0.73-0.77) and an area under 
the precision-recall curve of 0.22. Overall calibration was good [integrated 
calibration index (ICI) = 1.05%]; however, miscalibration was observed at the 
extreme ends of the distribution of predicted probabilities. Interventions 
provided to the 20% of people with highest risk would identify 49% of AD cases 
and require treating four people without AD to reach one with AD. Important 
predictors of increased risk included younger onset of alcohol use, males, 
higher cohort alcohol use and more mental disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: A risk algorithm can be created using data collected at the onset 
of regular alcohol use to target youth at highest risk of alcohol dependence by 
early adulthood. Important considerations remain for advancing the development 
and practical implementation of such models.
Society for the Study of Addiction.
361
BACKGROUND: Congestive heart failure (CHF) is a disease that requires complex 
management involving multiple medications, exercise, and lifestyle changes. It 
mainly affects older patients with depression and anxiety, who commonly find 
management difficult. Existing mobile apps supporting the self-management of CHF 
have limited features and are inadequately validated.
OBJECTIVE: The HeartMan project aims to develop a personal health system that 
would comprehensively address CHF self-management by using sensing devices and 
artificial intelligence methods. This paper presents the design of the system 
and reports on the accuracy of its patient-monitoring methods, overall 
effectiveness, and patient perceptions.
METHODS: A mobile app was developed as the core of the HeartMan system, and the 
app was connected to a custom wristband and cloud services. The system features 
machine learning methods for patient monitoring: continuous blood pressure (BP) 
estimation, physical activity monitoring, and psychological profile recognition. 
These methods feed a decision support system that provides recommendations on 
physical health and psychological support. The system was designed using a 
human-centered methodology involving the patients throughout development. It was 
evaluated in a proof-of-concept trial with 56 patients.
RESULTS: Fairly high accuracy of the patient-monitoring methods was observed. 
The mean absolute error of BP estimation was 9.0 mm Hg for systolic BP and 7.0 
mm Hg for diastolic BP. The accuracy of psychological profile detection was 
88.6%. The F-measure for physical activity recognition was 71%. The 
proof-of-concept clinical trial in 56 patients showed that the HeartMan system 
significantly improved self-care behavior (P=.02), whereas depression and 
anxiety rates were significantly reduced (P<.001), as were perceived sexual 
problems (P=.01). According to the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of 
Technology questionnaire, a positive attitude toward HeartMan was seen among end 
users, resulting in increased awareness, self-monitoring, and empowerment.
CONCLUSIONS: The HeartMan project combined a range of advanced technologies with 
human-centered design to develop a complex system that was shown to help 
patients with CHF. More psychological than physical benefits were observed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03497871; 
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): 
RR2-10.1186/s12872-018-0921-2.
Els Clays, Amos Adeyemo Dawodu, Jan Derboven, Delphine De Smedt, Erik Dovgan, 
362
PURPOSE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are 
representative disorders of dementia of the elderly and the neuroimaging has 
contributed to early diagnosis by estimation of alterations of brain volume, 
blood flow and metabolism. A brain network analysis by MR imaging (MR 
connectome) is a recently developed technique and can estimate the dysfunction 
of the brain network in AD and DLB. A graph theory which is a major technique of 
network analysis is useful for a group study to extract the feature of 
disorders, but is not necessarily suitable for the disorder differentiation at 
the individual level. In this investigation, we propose a deep learning 
technique as an alternative method of the graph analysis for recognition and 
classification of AD and DLB at the individual subject level.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-eight brain structural connectivity data of 18 AD, 
8 DLB and 22 healthy controls were applied to the machine learning consisting of 
a six-layer convolution neural network (CNN) model. Estimation of the deep 
learning model to classify AD, DLB and non-AD/DLB was performed using the 4-fold 
cross-validation method.
RESULTS: The accuracy, average precision and recall of our CNN model were 0.73, 
0.78 and 0.73, and the specificity precision and recall were 0.68 and 0.79 in 
AD, 0.94 and 0.65 in DLB and 0.73 and 0.75 in non-AD/DLB. The triangular 
probability map of the MR connectome revealed the probability of AD, DLB and 
non-AD/DLB in each subject.
CONCLUSION: Our preliminary investigation revealed the adaptation of deep 
learning to the MR connectome and proposed its utility in the differentiation of 
dementia disorders at the individual subject level.
363
BACKGROUND: With the aging of populations worldwide, early detection of 
cognitive impairments has become a research and clinical priority, particularly 
to enable preventive intervention for dementia. Automated analysis of the 
drawing process has been studied as a promising means for lightweight, 
self-administered cognitive assessment. However, this approach has not been 
sufficiently tested for its applicability across populations.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the applicability of automated 
analysis of the drawing process for estimating global cognition in 
community-dwelling older adults across populations in different nations.
METHODS: We collected drawing data with a digital tablet, along with Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scores for assessment of global cognition, from 92 
community-dwelling older adults in the United States and Japan. We automatically 
extracted 6 drawing features that characterize the drawing process in terms of 
the drawing speed, pauses between drawings, pen pressure, and pen inclinations. 
We then investigated the association between the drawing features and MoCA 
scores through correlation and machine learning-based regression analyses.
RESULTS: We found that, with low MoCA scores, there tended to be higher 
variability in the drawing speed, a higher pause:drawing duration ratio, and 
lower variability in the pen's horizontal inclination in both the US and Japan 
data sets. A machine learning model that used drawing features to estimate MoCA 
scores demonstrated its capability to generalize from the US dataset to the 
Japan dataset (R2=0.35; permutation test, P<.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This study presents initial empirical evidence of the capability of 
automated analysis of the drawing process as an estimator of global cognition 
that is applicable across populations. Our results suggest that such automated 
analysis may enable the development of a practical tool for international use in 
self-administered, automated cognitive assessment.
Glorioso, Ellen E Lee, Rebecca Daly, Camille Nebeker, Elizabeth W Twamley, Colin 
364
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia that involves a 
progressive and irrevocable decline in cognitive abilities and social behavior, 
thus annihilating the patient's autonomy. The theoretical assumption that 
disease-modifying drugs are most effective in the early stages hopefully in the 
prodromal stage called mild cognitive impairment (MCI) urgently pushes toward 
the identification of robust and individualized markers of cognitive decline to 
establish an early pharmacological intervention. This requires the combination 
of well-established neural mechanisms and the development of increasingly 
sensitive methodologies. Among the neurophysiological markers of attention and 
cognition, one of the sub-components of the 'cognitive brain wave' P300 
recordable in an odd-ball paradigm -namely the P3b- is extensively regarded as a 
sensitive indicator of cognitive performance. Several studies have reliably 
shown that changes in the amplitude and latency of the P3b are strongly related 
to cognitive decline and aging both healthy and pathological. Here, we used a 
P3b spatial filter to enhance the electroencephalographic (EEG) characteristics 
underlying 175 subjects divided into 135 MCI subjects, 20 elderly controls (EC), 
and 20 young volunteers (Y). The Y group served to extract the P3b spatial 
filter from EEG data, which was later applied to the other groups during resting 
conditions with eyes open and without being asked to perform any task. The group 
of 135 MCI subjects could be divided into two subgroups at the end of a month 
follow-up: 75 with stable MCI (MCI-S, not converted to AD), 60 converted to AD 
(MCI-C). The P3b spatial filter was built by means of a signal processing method 
called Functional Source Separation (FSS), which increases signal-to-noise ratio 
by using a weighted sum of all EEG recording channels rather than relying on a 
single, or a small sub-set, of channels. A clear difference was observed for the 
P3b dynamics at rest between groups. Moreover, a machine learning approach 
showed that P3b at rest could correctly distinguish MCI from EC (80.6% accuracy) 
and MCI-S from MCI-C (74.1% accuracy), with an accuracy as high as 93.8% in 
discriminating between MCI-C and EC. Finally, a comparison of the Bayes factor 
revealed that the group differences among MCI-S and MCI-C were 138 times more 
likely to be detected using the P3b dynamics compared with the best performing 
single electrode (Pz) approach. In conclusion, we propose that P3b as measured 
through spatial filters can be safely regarded as a simple and sensitive marker 
to predict the conversion from an MCI to AD status eventually combined with 
other non-neurophysiological biomarkers for a more precise definition of 
dementia having neuropathological Alzheimer characteristics.
365
Dementia is a chronic syndrome which is common among the elderly and is 
associated with significant morbidity and mortality for patients and their 
caregivers. Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common form of clinical dementia, 
is biologically characterized by the deposition of amyloid-β plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles in the brain. The onset of AD begins decades before 
manifestation of symptoms and clinical diagnosis, underlining the need to shift 
from clinical diagnosis of AD to a more objective diagnosis using biomarkers. 
Having performed a literature search of original articles and reviews on PubMed 
and Google Scholar, we present this review detailing the existing biomarkers and 
risk assessment tools for AD. The prevalence of dementia in low- and 
middle-income countries (LMICs) is predicted to increase over the next couple of 
years. Thus, we aimed to identify potential biomarkers that may be appropriate 
for use in LMICs, considering the following factors: sensitivity, specificity, 
invasiveness, and affordability of the biomarkers. We also explored risk 
assessment tools and the potential use of artificial intelligence/machine 
learning solutions for diagnosing, assessing risks, and monitoring the 
progression of AD in low-resource settings. Routine use of AD biomarkers has yet 
to gain sufficient ground in clinical settings. Therefore, clinical diagnosis of 
AD will remain the mainstay in LMICs for the foreseeable future. Efforts should 
be made towards the development of low-cost, easily administered risk assessment 
tools to identify individuals who are at risk of AD in the population. We 
recommend that stakeholders invest in education, research and development 
targeted towards effective risk assessment and management.
366
OBJECTIVE: The dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) has been identified as a 
neuromodulation target for alleviating suicidal ideation. Dysfunctional DLPFC 
has been implicated in suicidality in depression. This study aimed to 
investigate the functional connectivity (FC) of the DLPFC in late-life 
depression (LLD) with suicidal ideation.
METHODS: Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data from 32 
LLD patients with suicidal ideation (LLD-S), 41 LLD patients without suicidal 
ideation (LLD-NS), and 54 healthy older adults (HOA) were analyzed using DLPFC 
seed-based FC analyses. Group differences in FC were examined, and machine 
learning was applied to explore the potential of DLPFC-FC for classifying LLD-S 
from LLD-NS.
RESULTS: Abnormal DLPFC-FC patterns were observed in LLD-S, characterized by 
lower connectivity with the angular gyrus, precuneus, and superior frontal gyrus 
compared to LLD-NS and healthy controls. A classification model based on the 
identified DLPFC-FC achieved an accuracy of 75%.
CONCLUSION: The lower FC of DLPFC networks may contribute to the neurobiological 
mechanism of suicidal ideation in late-life depression. These findings may 
facilitate suicide prevention for LLD by providing potential neuroimaging 
markers and network-based neuromodulation targets. However, further confirmation 
with larger sample sizes and experimental designs is warranted.
367
BACKGROUND: A significant number of late middle-aged adults with depression have 
a high illness burden resulting from chronic conditions which put them at high 
risk of hospitalization. Many late middle-aged adults are covered by commercial 
health insurance, but such insurance claims have not been used to identify the 
risk of hospitalization in individuals with depression. In the present study, we 
developed and validated a non-proprietary model to identify late middle-aged 
adults with depression at risk for hospitalization, using machine learning 
methods.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study involved 71,682 commercially insured 
older adults aged 55-64 years diagnosed with depression. National health 
insurance claims were used to capture demographics, health care utilization, and 
health status during the base year. Health status was captured using 70 chronic 
health conditions, and 46 mental health conditions. The outcomes were 1- and 
2-year preventable hospitalization. For each of our two outcomes, we evaluated 
seven modelling approaches: four prediction models utilized logistic regression 
with different combinations of predictors to evaluate the relative contribution 
of each group of variables, and three prediction models utilized machine 
learning approaches - logistic regression with LASSO penalty, random forests 
(RF), and gradient boosting machine (GBM).
RESULTS: Our predictive model for 1-year hospitalization achieved an AUC of 
0.803, with a sensitivity of 72% and a specificity of 76% under the optimum 
threshold of 0.463, and our predictive model for 2-year hospitalization achieved 
an AUC of 0.793, with a sensitivity of 76% and a specificity of 71% under the 
optimum threshold of 0.452. For predicting both 1-year and 2-year risk of 
preventable hospitalization, our best performing models utilized the machine 
learning approach of logistic regression with LASSO penalty which outperformed 
more black-box machine learning models like RF and GBM.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates the feasibility of identifying depressed 
middle-aged adults at higher risk of future hospitalization due to burden of 
chronic illnesses using basic demographic information and diagnosis codes 
recorded in health insurance claims. Identifying this population may assist 
health care planners in developing effective screening strategies and management 
approaches and in efficient allocation of public healthcare resources as this 
population transitions to publicly funded healthcare programs, e.g., Medicare in 
the US.
368
OBJECTIVES: Established visual brain MRI markers for dementia include 
hippocampal atrophy (mesio-temporal atrophy MTA), white matter lesions (Fazekas 
score), and number of cerebral microbleeds (CMBs). We assessed whether novel 
quantitative, artificial intelligence (AI)-based volumetric scores provide 
additional value in predicting subsequent cognitive decline in elderly controls.
METHODS: A prospective study including 80 individuals (46 females, mean age 73.4 
± 3.5 years). 3T MR imaging was performed at baseline. Extensive 
neuropsychological assessment was performed at baseline and at 4.5-year 
follow-up. AI-based volumetric scores were derived from 3DT1: Alzheimer Disease 
Resemblance Atrophy Index (AD-RAI), Brain Age Gap Estimate (BrainAGE), and 
normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) index. Analyses included regression models 
between cognitive scores and imaging markers.
RESULTS: AD-RAI score at baseline was associated with Corsi (visuospatial 
memory) decline (10.6% of cognitive variability in multiple regression models). 
After inclusion of MTA, CMB, and Fazekas scores simultaneously, the AD-RAI score 
remained as the sole valid predictor of the cognitive outcome explaining 16.7% 
of its variability. Its percentage reached 21.4% when amyloid positivity was 
considered an additional explanatory factor. BrainAGE score was associated with 
Trail Making B (executive functions) decrease (8.5% of cognitive variability). 
Among the conventional MRI markers, only the Fazekas score at baseline was 
positively related to the cognitive outcome (8.7% of cognitive variability). The 
addition of the BrainAGE score as an independent variable significantly 
increased the percentage of cognitive variability explained by the regression 
model (from 8.7 to 14%). The addition of amyloid positivity led to a further 
increase in this percentage reaching 21.8%.
CONCLUSIONS: The AI-based AD-RAI index and BrainAGE scores have limited but 
significant added value in predicting the subsequent cognitive decline in 
elderly controls when compared to the established visual MRI markers of brain 
aging, notably MTA, Fazekas score, and number of CMBs.
KEY POINTS: • AD-RAI score at baseline was associated with Corsi score 
(visuospatial memory) decline. • BrainAGE score was associated with Trail Making 
B (executive functions) decrease. • AD-RAI index and BrainAGE scores have 
limited but significant added value in predicting the subsequent cognitive 
decline in elderly controls when compared to the established visual MRI markers 
of brain aging, notably MTA, Fazekas score, and number of CMBs.
369
BACKGROUND: With the rapid growth of the older adult population worldwide, car 
accidents involving this population group have become an increasingly serious 
problem. Cognitive impairment, which is assessed using neuropsychological tests, 
has been reported as a risk factor for being involved in car accidents; however, 
it remains unclear whether this risk can be predicted using daily behavior data.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate whether speech data 
that can be collected in everyday life can be used to predict the risk of an 
older driver being involved in a car accident.
METHODS: At baseline, we collected (1) speech data during interactions with a 
voice assistant and (2) cognitive assessment data-neuropsychological tests 
(Mini-Mental State Examination, revised Wechsler immediate and delayed logical 
memory, Frontal Assessment Battery, trail making test-parts A and B, and Clock 
Drawing Test), Geriatric Depression Scale, magnetic resonance imaging, and 
demographics (age, sex, education)-from older adults. Approximately 
one-and-a-half years later, we followed up to collect information about their 
driving experiences (with respect to car accidents) using a questionnaire. We 
investigated the association between speech data and future accident risk using 
statistical analysis and machine learning models.
RESULTS: We found that older drivers (n=60) with accident or near-accident 
experiences had statistically discernible differences in speech features that 
suggest cognitive impairment such as reduced speech rate (P=.048) and increased 
response time (P=.040). Moreover, the model that used speech features could 
predict future accident or near-accident experiences with 81.7% accuracy, which 
was 6.7% higher than that using cognitive assessment data, and could achieve up 
to 88.3% accuracy when the model used both types of data.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides the first empirical results that suggest 
analysis of speech data recorded during interactions with voice assistants could 
help predict future accident risk for older drivers by capturing subtle 
impairments in cognitive function.
Nemoto, Kiyotaka Nemoto, Tetsuaki Arai. Originally published in the Journal of 
370
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Late-onset epilepsy is a heterogenous entity 
associated with specific aetiologies and an elevated risk of premature 
mortality. Specific multimorbid-socioeconomic profiles and their unique 
prognostic trajectories have not been described. We sought to determine if 
specific clusters of late onset epilepsy exist, and whether they have unique 
hazards of premature mortality.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective observational cohort study linking primary 
and hospital-based UK electronic health records with vital statistics data 
(covering years 1998-2019) to identify all cases of incident late onset epilepsy 
(from people aged ≥65) and 1:10 age, sex, and GP practice-matched controls. We 
applied hierarchical agglomerative clustering using common aetiologies 
identified at baseline to define multimorbid-socioeconomic profiles, compare 
hazards of early mortality, and tabulating causes of death stratified by 
cluster.
RESULTS: From 1,032,129 people aged ≥65, we identified 1048 cases of late onset 
epilepsy who were matched to 10,259 controls. Median age at epilepsy diagnosis 
was 68 (interquartile range: 66-72) and 474 (45%) were female. The hazard of 
premature mortality related to late-onset epilepsy was higher than matched 
controls (hazard ratio [HR] 1.73; 95% confidence interval [95%CI] 1.51-1.99). 
Ten unique phenotypic clusters were identified, defined by 'healthy' males and 
females, ischaemic stroke, intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH), ICH and alcohol 
misuse, dementia and anxiety, anxiety, depression in males and females, and 
brain tumours. Cluster-specific hazards were often similar to that derived for 
late-onset epilepsy as a whole. Clusters that differed significantly from the 
base late-onset epilepsy hazard were 'dementia and anxiety' (HR 5.36; 95%CI 
3.31-8.68), 'brain tumour' (HR 4.97; 95%CI 2.89-8.56), 'ICH and alcohol misuse' 
(HR 2.91; 95%CI 1.76-4.81), and 'ischaemic stroke' (HR 2.83; 95%CI 1.83-4.04). 
These cluster-specific risks were also elevated compared to those derived for 
tumours, dementia, ischaemic stroke, and ICH in the whole population. 
Seizure-related cause of death was uncommon and restricted to the ICH, ICH and 
alcohol misuse, and healthy female clusters.
SIGNIFICANCE: Late-onset epilepsy is an amalgam of unique phenotypic clusters 
that can be quantitatively defined. Late-onset epilepsy and cluster-specific 
comorbid profiles have complex effects on premature mortality above and beyond 
the base rates attributed to epilepsy and cluster-defining comorbidities alone.
371
BACKGROUND: At present, no predictive markers for Major Depressive Disorder 
(MDD) exist. The search for such markers has been challenging due to clinical 
and molecular heterogeneity of MDD, the lack of statistical power in studies and 
suboptimal statistical tools applied to multidimensional data. Machine learning 
is a powerful approach to mitigate some of these limitations.
METHODS: We aimed to identify the predictive markers of recurrent MDD in the 
elderly using peripheral whole blood from the Sydney Memory and Aging Study 
(SMAS) (N = 521, aged over 65) and adopting machine learning methodology on 
transcriptome data. Fuzzy Forests is a Random Forests-based classification 
algorithm that takes advantage of the co-expression network structure between 
genes; it allows to alleviate the problem of p >> n via reducing the 
dimensionality of transcriptomic feature space.
RESULTS: By adopting Fuzzy Forests on transcriptome data, we found that the 
downregulated TFRC (transferrin receptor) can predict recurrent MDD with an 
accuracy of 63%.
LIMITATIONS: Although we corrected our data for several important confounders, 
we were not able to account for the comorbidities and medication taken, which 
may be numerous in the elderly and might have affected the levels of gene 
transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that downregulated TFRC is predictive of recurrent MDD, 
which is consistent with the previous literature, indicating the role of the 
innate immune system in depression. This study is the first to successfully 
apply Fuzzy Forests methodology on psychiatric condition, opening, therefore, a 
methodological avenue that can lead to clinically useful predictive markers of 
complex traits.
372
BACKGROUND: Cognitive abilities, particularly memory, normally decline with age. 
However, some individuals, often designated as superagers, can reach late life 
with the memory function of individuals 30 years younger. We aimed to 
characterise the brain structure of superagers and identify demographic, 
lifestyle, and clinical factors associated with this phenotype.
METHODS: We selected cognitively healthy participants from the Vallecas Project 
longitudinal cohort recruited between Oct 10, 2011, and Jan 14, 2014, aged 79·5 
years or older, on the basis of their delayed verbal episodic memory score. 
Participants were assessed with the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test and 
with three non-memory tests (the 15-item version of the Boston Naming Test, the 
Digit Symbol Substitution Test, and the Animal Fluency Test). Participants were 
classified as superagers if they scored at or above the mean values for a 
50-56-year-old in the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test and within one 
standard deviation of the mean or above for their age and education level in the 
three non-memory tests, or as typical older adults if they scored within one 
standard deviation of the mean for their age and education level in the Free and 
Cued Selective Reminding Test. Data acquired as per protocol from up to six 
yearly follow-ups were used for longitudinal analyses.
FINDINGS: We included 64 superagers (mean age 81·9 years; 38 [59%] women and 26 
[41%] men) and 55 typical older adults (82·4 years; 35 [64%] women and 20 [36%] 
men). The median number of follow-up visits was 5·0 (IQR 5·0-6·0) for superagers 
and 5·0 (4·5-6·0) for typical older adults. Superagers exhibited higher grey 
matter volume cross-sectionally in the medial temporal lobe, cholinergic 
forebrain, and motor thalamus. Longitudinally, superagers also showed slower 
total grey matter atrophy, particularly within the medial temporal lobe, than 
did typical older adults. A machine learning classification including 89 
demographic, lifestyle, and clinical predictors showed that faster movement 
speed (despite no group differences in exercise frequency) and better mental 
health were the most differentiating factors for superagers. Similar 
concentrations of dementia blood biomarkers in superager and typical older adult 
groups suggest that group differences reflect inherent superager resistance to 
typical age-related memory loss.
INTERPRETATION: Factors associated with dementia prevention are also relevant 
for resistance to age-related memory decline and brain atrophy, and the 
association between superageing and movement speed could provide potential novel 
insights into how to preserve memory function into the ninth decade.
FUNDING: Queen Sofia Foundation, CIEN Foundation, Spanish Ministry of Science 
and Innovation, Alzheimer's Association, European Research Council, MAPFRE 
Foundation, Carl Zeiss Foundation, and the EU Comission for Horizon 2020.
TRANSLATION: For the Spanish translation of the abstract see Supplementary 
Materials section.
373
Neuropsychological test is an essential tool in assessing cognitive and 
functional changes associated with late-life neurocognitive disorders. Despite 
the utility of the neuropsychological test, the brain-wide neural basis of the 
test performance remains unclear. Using the predictive modeling approach, we 
aimed to identify the optimal combination of functional connectivities that 
predicts neuropsychological test scores of novel individuals. Resting-state 
functional connectivity and neuropsychological tests included in the OASIS-3 
dataset (n = 428) were used to train the predictive models, and the identified 
models were iteratively applied to the holdout internal test set (n = 216) and 
external test set (KSHAP, n = 151). We found that the connectivity-based 
predicted score tracked the actual behavioral test scores (r = 0.08-0.44). The 
predictive models utilizing most of the connectivity features showed better 
accuracy than those composed of focal connectivity features, suggesting that its 
neural basis is largely distributed across multiple brain systems. The 
discriminant and clinical validity of the predictive models were further 
assessed. Our results suggest that late-life neuropsychological test performance 
can be formally characterized with distributed connectome-based predictive 
models, and further translational evidence is needed when developing 
theoretically valid and clinically incremental predictive models.
374
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of 
neurodegenerative dementia in the elderly population. Scientific research is 
very active in the challenge of designing automated approaches to achieve an 
early and certain diagnosis. Recently an international competition among AD 
predictors has been organized: "A Machine learning neuroimaging challenge for 
automated diagnosis of Mild Cognitive Impairment" (MLNeCh). This competition is 
based on pre-processed sets of T1-weighted Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI) to be 
classified in four categories: stable AD, individuals with MCI who converted to 
AD, individuals with MCI who did not convert to AD and healthy controls.
NEW METHOD: In this work, we propose a method to perform early diagnosis of AD, 
which is evaluated on MLNeCh dataset. Since the automatic classification of AD 
is based on the use of feature vectors of high dimensionality, different 
techniques of feature selection/reduction are compared in order to avoid the 
curse-of-dimensionality problem, then the classification method is obtained as 
the combination of Support Vector Machines trained using different clusters of 
data extracted from the whole training set.
RESULTS: The multi-classifier approach proposed in this work outperforms all the 
stand-alone method tested in our experiments. The final ensemble is based on a 
set of classifiers, each trained on a different cluster of the training data. 
The proposed ensemble has the great advantage of performing well using a very 
reduced version of the data (the reduction factor is more than 90%). The MATLAB 
code for the ensemble of classifiers will be publicly available1 to other 
researchers for future comparisons.
375
The progressive, chronic nature of Alzheimer's disease (AD), a form of dementia, 
defaces the adulthood of elderly individuals. The pathogenesis of the condition 
is primarily unascertained, turning the treatment efficacy more arduous. 
Therefore, understanding the genetic etiology of AD is essential to identifying 
targeted therapeutics. This study aimed to use machine-learning techniques of 
expressed genes in patients with AD to identify potential biomarkers that can be 
used for future therapy. The dataset is accessed from the Gene Expression 
Omnibus (GEO) database (Accession Number: GSE36980). The subgroups (AD blood 
samples from frontal, hippocampal, and temporal regions) are individually 
investigated against non-AD models. Prioritized gene cluster analyses are 
conducted with the STRING database. The candidate gene biomarkers were trained 
with various supervised machine-learning (ML) classification algorithms. The 
interpretation of the model prediction is perpetrated with explainable 
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques. This experiment revealed 34, 60, and 28 
genes as target biomarkers of AD mapped from the frontal, hippocampal, and 
temporal regions. It is identified ORAI2 as a shared biomarker in all three 
areas strongly associated with AD's progression. The pathway analysis showed 
that STIM1 and TRPC3 are strongly associated with ORAI2. We found three hub 
genes, TPI1, STIM1, and TRPC3, in the network of the ORAI2 gene that might be 
involved in the molecular pathogenesis of AD. Naive Bayes classified the samples 
of different groups by fivefold cross-validation with 100% accuracy. AI and ML 
are promising tools in identifying disease-associated genes that will advance 
the field of targeted therapeutics against genetic diseases.
376
A growing elderly population suffering from incurable, chronic conditions such 
as dementia present a continual strain on medical services due to mental 
impairment paired with high comorbidity resulting in increased hospitalization 
risk. The identification of at risk individuals allows for preventative measures 
to alleviate said strain. Electronic health records provide opportunity for big 
data analysis to address such applications. Such data however, provides a 
challenging problem space for traditional statistics and machine learning due to 
high dimensionality and sparse data elements. This article proposes a novel 
machine learning methodology: entropy regularization with ensemble deep neural 
networks (ECNN), which simultaneously provides high predictive performance of 
hospitalization of patients with dementia whilst enabling an interpretable 
heuristic analysis of the model architecture, able to identify individual 
features of importance within a large feature domain space. Experimental results 
on health records containing 54,647 features were able to identify 10 event 
indicators within a patient timeline: a collection of diagnostic events, 
medication prescriptions and procedural events, the highest ranked being 
essential hypertension. The resulting subset was still able to provide a highly 
competitive hospitalization prediction (Accuracy: 0.759) as compared to the full 
feature domain (Accuracy: 0.755) or traditional feature selection techniques 
(Accuracy: 0.737), a significant reduction in feature size. The discovery and 
heuristic evidence of correlation provide evidence for further clinical study of 
said medical events as potential novel indicators. There also remains great 
potential for adaption of ECNN within other medical big data domains as a data 
mining tool for novel risk factor identification.
377
BACKGROUND: Speech impairments are an early feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
and consequently, analysing speech performance is a promising new digital 
biomarker for AD screening. Future clinical AD trials on disease modifying drugs 
will require a shift to very early identification of individuals at risk of 
dementia. Hence, digital markers of language and speech may offer a method for 
screening of at-risk populations that are at the earliest stages of AD, 
eventually in combination with advanced machine learning. To this end, we 
developed a screening battery consisting of speech-based neurocognitive tests. 
The automated test performs a remote primary screening using a simple telephone.
OBJECTIVES: PROSPECT-AD aims to validate speech biomarkers for identification of 
individuals with early signs of AD and monitor their longitudinal course through 
access to well-phenotyped cohorts.
DESIGN: PROSPECT-AD leverages ongoing cohorts such as EPAD (UK), DESCRIBE and 
DELCODE (Germany), and BioFINDER Primary Care (Sweden) and Beta-AARC (Spain) by 
adding a collection of speech data over the telephone to existing longitudinal 
follow-ups. Participants at risk of dementia are recruited from existing parent 
cohorts across Europe to form an AD 'probability-spectrum', i.e., individuals 
with a low risk to high risk of developing AD dementia. The characterization of 
cognition, biomarker and risk factor (genetic and environmental) status of each 
research participants over time combined with audio recordings of speech samples 
will provide a well-phenotyped population for comparing novel speech markers 
with current gold standard biomarkers and cognitive scores.
PARTICIPANTS: N= 1000 participants aged 50 or older will be included in total, 
with a clinical dementia rating scale (CDR) score of 0 or 0.5. The study 
protocol is planned to run according to sites between 12 and 18 months.
MEASUREMENTS: The speech protocol includes the following neurocognitive tests 
which will be administered remotely: Word List [Memory Function], Verbal Fluency 
[Executive Functions] and spontaneous free speech [Psychological and/ or 
behavioral symptoms]. Speech features on the linguistic and paralinguistic level 
will be extracted from the recordings and compared to data from CSF and blood 
biomarkers, neuroimaging, neuropsychological evaluations, genetic profiles, and 
family history. Primary candidate marker from speech will be a combination of 
most significant features in comparison to biomarkers as reference measure. 
Machine learning and computational techniques will be employed to identify the 
most significant speech biomarkers that could represent an early indicator of AD 
pathology. Furthermore, based on the analysis of speech performances, models 
will be trained to predict cognitive decline and disease progression across the 
AD continuum.
CONCLUSION: The outcome of PROSPECT-AD may support AD drug development research 
as well as primary or tertiary prevention of dementia by providing a validated 
tool using a remote approach for identifying individuals at risk of dementia and 
monitoring individuals over time, either in a screening context or in clinical 
trials.
378
Language production provides important markers of neurological health. One 
feature of impairments of language and cognition, such as those that occur in 
stroke aphasia or Alzheimer's disease, is an overuse of high frequency, 
"familiar" expressions. We used computerized analysis to profile narrative 
speech samples from speakers with variants of frontotemporal dementia (FTD), 
including subtypes of primary progressive aphasia (PPA). Analysis was performed 
on language samples from 29 speakers with semantic variant PPA (svPPA), 25 
speakers with logopenic variant PPA (lvPPA), 34 speakers with non-fluent variant 
PPA (nfvPPA), 14 speakers with behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD) and 20 older 
normal controls (NCs). We used frequency and collocation strength measures to 
determine use of familiar words and word combinations. We also computed word 
counts, content word ratio and a combination ratio, a measure of the degree to 
which the individual produces connected language. All dementia subtypes differed 
significantly from NCs. The most discriminating variables were word count, 
combination ratio, and content word ratio, each of which distinguished at least 
one dementia group from NCs. All participants with PPA, but not participants 
with bvFTD, produced significantly more frequent forms at the level of content 
words, word combinations, or both. Each dementia group differed from the others 
on at least one variable, and language production variables correlated with 
established behavioral measures of disease progression. A machine learning 
classifier, using narrative speech variables, achieved 90% accuracy when 
classifying samples as NC or dementia, and 59.4% accuracy when matching samples 
to their diagnostic group. Automated quantification of spontaneous speech in 
both language-led and non-language led dementias, is feasible. It allows 
extraction of syndromic profiles that complement those derived from standardized 
tests, warranting further evaluation as candidate biomarkers. Inclusion of 
frequency-based language variables benefits profiling and classification.
379
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia, accounting for 70% of 
cases worldwide. By 2050, dementia prevalence will have tripled, with most new 
cases occurring in low- and middle-income countries. Mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) is a stage between healthy aging and dementia, marked by cognitive 
deficits that do not impair daily living. People with MCI are at increased risk 
of dementia, with an average progression rate of 39% within 5 years. There is 
urgent need for low-cost, accessible and objective methods to facilitate early 
dementia detection. Electroencephalography (EEG) has potential to address this 
need due to its low cost and portability. Here, we collected resting state EEG, 
structural MRI (sMRI) and rich neuropsychological data from older adults (55+ 
years) with AD, amnestic MCI (aMCI) and healthy controls (~60 per group). We 
evaluated a range of candidate EEG markers (i.e., frequency band power and 
functional connectivity) for AD and aMCI classification and compared their 
performance with sMRI. We also tested a combined EEG and cognitive 
classification model (using Mini-Mental State Examination; MMSE). sMRI 
outperformed resting state EEG at classifying AD (AUCs ​= ​1.00 vs 0.76, 
respectively). However, both EEG and sMRI were only moderately good at 
distinguishing aMCI from healthy aging (AUCs ​= ​0.67-0.73), and neither method 
achieved sensitivity above 70%. The addition of EEG to MMSE scores had no added 
benefit relative to MMSE scores alone. This is the first direct comparison of 
EEG and sMRI for classification of AD and aMCI.
380
BACKGROUND: To evaluate the interest of using automatic speech analyses for the 
assessment of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early-stage Alzheimer's 
disease (AD).
METHODS: Healthy elderly control (HC) subjects and patients with MCI or AD were 
recorded while performing several short cognitive vocal tasks. The voice 
recordings were processed, and the first vocal markers were extracted using 
speech signal processing techniques. Second, the vocal markers were tested to 
assess their "power" to distinguish among HC, MCI, and AD. The second step 
included training automatic classifiers for detecting MCI and AD, using machine 
learning methods and testing the detection accuracy.
RESULTS: The classification accuracy of automatic audio analyses were as 
follows: between HCs and those with MCI, 79% ± 5%; between HCs and those with 
AD, 87% ± 3%; and between those with MCI and those with AD, 80% ± 5%, 
demonstrating its assessment utility.
CONCLUSION: Automatic speech analyses could be an additional objective 
assessment tool for elderly with cognitive decline.
381
The systematic assessment of cognitive performance of older people without 
cognitive complaints is controversial and unfeasible. Identifying individuals at 
higher risk of cognitive impairment could optimize resource allocation. We aimed 
to develop and test machine learning models to predict cognitive impairment 
using variables obtainable in primary care settings. In this cross-sectional 
study, we included 8,291 participants of the baseline assessment of the 
ELSA-Brasil study, who were aged between 50 and 74 years and were free of 
dementia. Cognitive performance was assessed with a neuropsychological battery 
and cognitive impairment was defined as global cognitive z-score below 2 
standard deviations. Variables used as input to the prediction models included 
demographics, social determinants, clinical conditions, family history, 
lifestyle, and laboratory tests. We developed machine learning models using 
logistic regression, neural networks, and gradient boosted trees. Participants' 
mean age was 58.3±6.2 years, 55% were female. Cognitive impairment was present 
in 328 individuals (4%). Machine learning algorithms presented fair to good 
discrimination (areas under the ROC curve between 0.801 and 0.873). Extreme 
Gradient Boosting presented the highest discrimination, high specificity (97%), 
and negative predictive value (97%). Seventy-six percent of the individuals with 
cognitive impairment were included among the highest ranked individuals by this 
algorithm. In conclusion, we developed and tested a machine learning model to 
predict cognitive impairment based on primary care data that presented good 
discrimination and high specificity. These characteristics could support the 
detection of patients who would not benefit from cognitive assessment, 
facilitating the allocation of human and economic resources.
382
Wrist-based wearables have been FDA approved for AF detection. However, the 
health behavior impact of false AF alerts from wearables on older patients at 
high risk for AF are not known. In this work, we analyzed data from the 
Pulsewatch (NCT03761394) study, which randomized patients (≥50 years) with 
history of stroke or transient ischemic attack to wear a patch monitor and a 
smartwatch linked to a smartphone running the Pulsewatch application vs to only 
the cardiac patch monitor over 14 days. At baseline and 14 days, participants 
completed validated instruments to assess for anxiety, patient activation, 
perceived mental and physical health, chronic symptom management self-efficacy, 
and medicine adherence. We employed linear regression to examine associations 
between false AF alerts with change in patient-reported outcomes. Receipt of 
false AF alerts was related to a dose-dependent decline in self-perceived 
physical health and levels of disease self-management. We developed a novel 
convolutional denoising autoencoder (CDA) to remove motion and noise artifacts 
in photoplethysmography (PPG) segments to optimize AF detection, which 
substantially reduced the number of false alerts. A promising approach to avoid 
negative impact of false alerts is to employ artificial intelligence driven 
algorithms to improve accuracy.
383
Background: Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and dementia differ in important 
ways yet share a future of increased prevalence. Separating these conditions 
from each other, and from Subjective Cognitive Impairment (SCI), is important 
for clinical prognoses and treatment, socio-legal interventions, and family 
adjustments. With costly clinical investigations and an aging population comes a 
need for more cost-efficient differential diagnostics. Methods: Using supervised 
machine learning, we investigated nine variables extracted from simple reaction 
time (SRT) data with respect to their single and conjoined ability to 
discriminate both MCI/dementia, and SCI/MCI/dementia, compared to-and together 
with-established psychometric tests. One-hundred-twenty elderly patients (age 
range = 65-95 years) were recruited when referred to full neuropsychological 
assessment at a specialized memory clinic in urban Sweden. A freely available 
SRT task served as index test and was administered and scored objectively by a 
computer before diagnosis of SCI (n = 17), MCI (n = 53), or dementia (n = 50). 
As reference standard, diagnosis was decided through the multidisciplinary 
memory clinic investigation. Bonferroni-Holm corrected P-values for constructed 
models against the null model are provided. Results: Algorithmic feature 
selection for the two final multivariable models was performed through recursive 
feature elimination with 3 × 10-fold cross-validation resampling. For both 
models, this procedure selected seven predictors of which five were SRT 
variables. When used as input for a soft-margin, radial-basis support vector 
machine model tuned via Bayesian optimization, the leave-one-out cross-validated 
accuracy of the final model for MCI/dementia classification was good (Accuracy = 
0.806 [0.716, INS [0].877], P < 0.001) and the final model for SCI/MCI/dementia 
classification held some merit (Accuracy = 0.650 [0.558, 0.735], P < 0.001). 
These two models are implemented in a freely available application for research 
and educatory use. Conclusions: Simple reaction time variables hold some 
potential in conjunction with established psychometric tests for differentiating 
MCI/dementia, and SCI/MCI/dementia in these difficult-to-differentiate memory 
clinic patients. While external validation is needed, their implementation 
within diagnostic support systems is promising.
384
BACKGROUND: Lying on the floor for a long period of time has been described as a 
critical determinant of prognosis following a fall. In addition to fall-related 
injuries due to the trauma itself, prolonged immobilization on the floor results 
in a wide range of comorbidities and may double the risk of death in elderly. 
Thus, reducing the length of Time On the Ground (TOG) in fallers seems crucial 
in vulnerable individuals with cognitive disorders who cannot get up 
independently.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine the effect of a new technology called 
SafelyYou Guardian (SYG) on early post-fall care including reduction of Time 
Until staff Assistance (TUA) and TOG.
METHODS: SYG uses continuous video monitoring, artificial intelligence, secure 
networks, and customized computer applications to detect and notify caregivers 
about falls in real time while providing immediate access to video footage of 
falls. The present observational study was conducted in 6 California memory care 
facilities where SYG was installed in bedrooms of consenting residents and 
families. Fall events were video recorded over 10 months. During the baseline 
installation period (November 2017 to December 2017), SYG video captures of 
falls were not provided on a regular basis to facility staff review. During a 
second period (January 2018 to April 2018), video captures were delivered to 
facility staff on a regular weekly basis. During the third period (May 2018 to 
August 2018), real-time notification (RTN) of any fall was provided to facility 
staff. Two digital markers (TUA, TOG) were automatically measured and compared 
between the baseline period (first 2 months) and the RTN period (last 4 months). 
The total number of falls including those happening outside of the bedroom (such 
as common areas and bathrooms) was separately reported by facility staff.
RESULTS: A total of 436 falls were recorded in 66 participants suffering from 
Alzheimer disease or related dementias (mean age 87 years; minimum 65, maximum 
104 years). Over 80% of the falls happened in bedrooms, with two-thirds 
occurring overnight (8 PM to 8 AM). While only 8.1% (22/272) of falls were 
scored as moderate or severe, fallers were not able to stand up alone in 97.6% 
(247/253) of the cases. Reductions of 28.3 (CI 19.6-37.1) minutes in TUA and 
29.6 (CI 20.3-38.9) minutes in TOG were observed between the baseline and RTN 
periods. The proportion of fallers with TOG >1 hour fell from 31% (8/26; 
baseline) to zero events (RTN period). During the RTN period, 76.6% (108/141) of 
fallers received human staff assistance in less than 10 minutes, and 55.3% 
(78/141) of them spent less than 10 minutes on the ground.
CONCLUSIONS: SYG technology is capable of reducing TOG and TUA while efficiently 
covering the area (bedroom) and time zone (nighttime) that are at highest risk. 
After 6 months of SYG monitoring, TOG was reduced by a factor of 3. The drastic 
reduction of TOG is likely to decrease secondary comorbid complications, improve 
post-fall prognosis, and reduce health care costs.
Subramaniam, Pulkit Agrawal, Raheema Hemraj, Alexandre Bayen, Bruce L Miller, 
385
Clinico-pathological correlation studies show that some otherwise healthy 
elderly individuals who never developed cognitive impairment harbor a burden of 
Alzheimer's disease lesions (plaques and tangles) that would be expected to 
result in dementia. In the absence of comorbidities explaining such 
discrepancies, there is a need to identify other brain changes that meaningfully 
contribute to the cognitive status of an individual in the face of such burdens 
of plaques and tangles. Glial inflammatory responses, a universal phenomenon in 
symptomatic AD, show robust association with degree of cognitive impairment, but 
their significance in early tau pathology stages and contribution to the 
trajectory of cognitive decline at an individual level remain widely unexplored. 
We studied 55 brains from individuals at intermediate stages of tau tangle 
pathology (Braak III-IV) with diverging antemortem cognition (demented vs. 
non-demented, here termed `resilient'), and age-matched cognitively normal 
controls (Braak 0-II). We conducted quantitative assessments of amyloid and tau 
lesions, cellular vulnerability markers, and glial phenotypes in temporal pole 
(Braak III-IV region) and visual cortex (Braak V-VI region) using 
artificial-intelligence based semiautomated quantifications. We found distinct 
glial responses with increased proinflammatory and decreased homeostatic 
markers, both in regions with tau tangles (temporal pole) and without overt tau 
deposits (visual cortex) in demented but not in resilient. These changes were 
significantly associated with markers of cortical cell damage. Similar 
phenotypic glial changes were detected in the white matter of demented but not 
resilient and were associated with higher burden of overlying cortical cellular 
damage in regions with and without tangles. Our data suggest that changes in 
glial phenotypes in cortical and subcortical regions represent an early 
phenomenon that precedes overt tau deposition and likely contributes to cell 
damage and loss of brain function predicting the cognitive status of individuals 
at intermediate stages of tau aggregate burden (Braak III-IV).
386
BACKGROUND: The extent to which gait and mobility measures predict falls 
relative to other risk factors is unclear. This study examined the predictive 
accuracy of over 70 baseline risk factors, including gait and mobility, for 
future falls and syncope using conditional inference forest models.
METHODS: Data from 3 waves of The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing (TILDA), a 
population-based study of community-dwelling adults aged ≥50 years were used (n 
= 4 706). Outcome variables were recurrent falls, injurious falls, unexplained 
falls, and syncope occurring over 4-year follow-up. The predictive accuracy was 
calculated using 5-fold cross-validation; as there was a class imbalance, the 
algorithm was trained using undersampling of the larger class. Classification 
rate, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), and 
area under the precision recall curve (PRAUC) assessed predictive accuracy.
RESULTS: Highest overall accuracy was 69.7% for recurrent falls in 50-64-year 
olds. AUROC and PRAUC were ≤0.69 and ≤0.39, respectively, for all outcomes 
indicating low predictive accuracy. History of falls, unsteadiness while 
walking, fear of falling, mobility, medications, mental health, and 
cardiovascular health and function were the most important predictors for most 
outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Conditional inference forest models using over 70 risk factors 
resulted in low predictive accuracy for future recurrent, injurious and 
unexplained falls, and syncope in community-dwelling adults. Gait and mobility 
impairments were important predictors of most outcomes but did not discriminate 
well between fallers and non-fallers. Results highlight the importance of 
multifactorial risk assessment and intervention and validate key modifiable risk 
factors for future falls and syncope.
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
387
INTRODUCTION: The prevalence of traumatic brain injury (TBI) among older adults 
is increasing exponentially. The sequelae can be severe in older adults and 
interact with age-related conditions such as multimorbidity. Despite this, TBI 
research in older adults is sparse. Minder, an in-home monitoring system 
developed by the UK Dementia Research Institute Centre for Care Research and 
Technology, uses infrared sensors and a bed mat to passively collect sleep and 
activity data. Similar systems have been used to monitor the health of older 
adults living with dementia. We will assess the feasibility of using this system 
to study changes in the health status of older adults in the early period 
post-TBI.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The study will recruit 15 inpatients (>60 years) with a 
moderate-severe TBI, who will have their daily activity and sleep patterns 
monitored using passive and wearable sensors over 6 months. Participants will 
report on their health during weekly calls, which will be used to validate 
sensor data. Physical, functional and cognitive assessments will be conducted 
across the duration of the study. Activity levels and sleep patterns derived 
from sensor data will be calculated and visualised using activity maps. 
Within-participant analysis will be performed to determine if participants are 
deviating from their own routines. We will apply machine learning approaches to 
activity and sleep data to assess whether the changes in these data can predict 
clinical events. Qualitative analysis of interviews conducted with participants, 
carers and clinical staff will assess acceptability and utility of the system.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval for this study has been granted by 
the London-Camberwell St Giles Research Ethics Committee (REC) (REC number: 
17/LO/2066). Results will be submitted for publication in peer-reviewed 
journals, presented at conferences and inform the design of a larger trial 
assessing recovery after TBI.
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
388
BACKGROUND: Although 50 years represents middle age among uninfected 
individuals, studies have shown that persons living with HIV (PWH) begin to 
demonstrate elevated risk for serious falls and fragility fractures in the sixth 
decade; the proportions of these outcomes attributable to modifiable factors are 
unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed 21,041 older PWH on antiretroviral therapy (ART) from the 
Veterans Aging Cohort Study from 01/01/2010 through 09/30/2015. Serious falls 
were identified by Ecodes and a machine-learning algorithm applied to radiology 
reports. Fragility fractures (hip, vertebral, and upper arm) were identified 
using ICD9 codes. Predictors for both models included a serious fall within the 
past 12 months, body mass index, physiologic frailty (VACS Index 2.0), illicit 
substance and alcohol use disorders, and measures of multimorbidity and 
polypharmacy. We separately fit multivariable logistic models to each outcome 
using generalized estimating equations. From these models, the longitudinal 
extensions of average attributable fraction (LE-AAF) for modifiable risk factors 
were estimated.
RESULTS: Key risk factors for both outcomes included physiologic frailty (VACS 
Index 2.0) (serious falls [15%; 95% CI 14%-15%]; fractures [13%; 95% CI 
12%-14%]), a serious fall in the past year (serious falls [7%; 95% CI 7%-7%]; 
fractures [5%; 95% CI 4%-5%]), polypharmacy (serious falls [5%; 95% CI 4%-5%]; 
fractures [5%; 95% CI 4%-5%]), an opioid prescription in the past month (serious 
falls [7%; 95% CI 6%-7%]; fractures [9%; 95% CI 8%-9%]), and diagnosis of 
alcohol use disorder (serious falls [4%; 95% CI 4%-5%]; fractures [8%; 95% CI 
7%-8%]).
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the contributions of risk factors important in 
the general population to both serious falls and fragility fractures among older 
PWH. Successful prevention programs for these outcomes should build on existing 
prevention efforts while including risk factors specific to PWH.
U.S. Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.
389
China is facing the peak of an ageing population, and there is an increase in 
demand for intelligent healthcare services for the elderly. The metaverse, as a 
new internet social communication space, has shown infinite potential for 
application. This paper focuses on the application of the metaverse in medicine 
in the intervention of cognitive decline in the elderly population. The problems 
in assessment and intervention of cognitive decline in the elderly group were 
analyzed. The basic data required to construct the metaverse in medicine was 
introduced. Moreover, it is demonstrated that the elderly users can conduct 
self-monitoring, experience immersive self-healing and health-care through the 
metaverse in medicine technology. Furthermore, we proposed that it is feasible 
that the metaverse in medicine has obvious advantages in prediction and 
diagnosis, prevention and rehabilitation, as well as assisting patients with 
cognitive decline. Risks for its application were pointed out as well. The 
metaverse in medicine technology solves the problem of non-face-to-face social 
communication for elderly users, which may help to reconstruct the social 
medical system and service mode for the elderly population.
Publisher: 
390
This study provided baseline data for preventing depression in female older 
adults living alone by understanding the degree of their depressive disorders 
and factors affecting these depressive disorders by analyzing epidemiological 
survey data representing South Koreans. To achieve the study objective, this 
study explored the main risk factors of depressive disorders using the stacking 
ensemble machine technique. Moreover, this study developed a nomogram that could 
help primary physicians easily interpret high-risk groups of depressive 
disorders in primary care settings based on the major predictors derived from 
machine learning. This study analyzed 582 female older adults (≥60 years old) 
living alone. The depressive disorder, a target variable, was measured using the 
Korean version of Patient Health Questionnaire-9. This study developed five 
single predictive models (GBM, Random Forest, Adaboost, SVM, XGBoost) and six 
stacking ensemble models (GBM + Bayesian regression, RandomForest + Bayesian 
regression, Adaboost + Bayesian regression, SVM + Bayesian regression, XGBoost + 
Bayesian regression, GBM + RandomForest + Adaboost + SVM + XGBoost + Bayesian 
regression) to predict depressive disorders. The naive Bayesian nomogram 
confirmed that stress perception, subjective health, n-6 fatty acid, n-3 fatty 
acid, mean hours of sitting per day, and mean daily sleep hours were six major 
variables related to the depressive disorders of female older adults living 
alone. Based on the results of this study, it is required to evaluate the 
multiple risk factors for depression including various measurable factors such 
as social support.
391
BACKGROUND: Cognitive and behavioral symptoms are the clinical hallmarks of 
neurocognitive disorders. Cognitive training may be offered to reduce the risks 
of cognitive decline and dementia and to reduce behavioral symptoms, such as 
apathy. Information and communication technology approaches, including serious 
games, can be useful in improving the playful aspect of computerized cognitive 
training and providing motivating solutions in elderly patients.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the effectiveness of 
employing the MeMo (Memory Motivation) Web app with regard to cognitive and 
behavioral symptoms in patients with neurocognitive disorders.
METHODS: MeMo is a Web app that can be used on any Web browser (computer or 
tablet). The training activities proposed in MeMo are divided into the following 
two parts: memory and mental flexibility/attention. The study included 46 
individuals (mean age 79.4 years) with a diagnosis of neurocognitive disorders 
at the Institut Claude Pompidou Memory Center in Nice. This randomized 
controlled study compared the evolution of cognition and behavior between 
patients not using MeMo (control group) and patients using MeMo (MeMo group) for 
12 weeks (four sessions per week). Patients underwent memory and attention 
tests, as well as an apathy assessment at baseline, week 12 (end of the training 
period), and week 24 (12 weeks after the end of the training sessions). In 
addition, to assess the impact of high and low game uses, the MeMo group was 
divided into patients who used MeMo according to the instructions (about once 
every 2 days; active MeMo group) and those who used it less (nonactive MeMo 
group).
RESULTS: When comparing cognitive and behavioral scores among baseline, week 12, 
and week 24, mixed model analysis for each cognitive and behavioral score 
indicated no significant interaction between testing time and group. On 
comparing the active MeMo group (n=9) and nonactive MeMo group (n=13), there 
were significant differences in two attention tests (Trial Making Test A 
[P=.045] and correct Digit Symbol Substitution Test items [P=.045]) and in the 
Apathy Inventory (AI) (P=.02). Mixed analysis (time: baseline, week 12, and week 
24 × number of active days) indicated only one significant interaction for the 
AI score (P=.01), with a significant increase in apathy in the nonactive MeMo 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that the cognitive and behavioral efficacies 
of MeMo, a Web-based training app, can be observed only with regular use of the 
app. Improvements were observed in attention and motivation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04142801; 
Montesino, Elsa Leone, Roxane Fabre, Jeremy Bourgeois. Originally published in 
392
BACKGROUND: Excessive and patterned ambulation is associated with falls, urinary 
tract infections, co-occurring delirium and other acute events among long-term 
care residents with cognitive impairment/dementia. This study will test a 
predictive longitudinal data model that may lead to the preservation of function 
of this vulnerable population.
METHODS/DESIGN: This is a single group, longitudinal study with natural 
observations. Data from a real-time locating system (RTLS) will be used to 
objectively and continuously measure ambulation activity for up to 2 years. 
These data will be combined with longitudinal acute event and functional status 
data to capture patterns of change in health status over time. Theory-driven 
multilevel models will be used to test the trajectories of falls and other acute 
conditions as a function of the ambulation activity and demographic, functional 
status, gait quality and balance ability including potential mediation and/or 
moderation effects. Data-driven machine learning algorithms will be applied to 
run screening of the high dimensional RTLS data together with other variables to 
discover new and robust predictors of acute events.
DISCUSSION: The findings from this study will lead to the early identification 
of older adults at risk for falls and the onset of acute medical conditions and 
interventions for individualized care.
393
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a type of dementia that affects the elderly 
population. A machine learning (ML) system has been trained to recognize 
particular patterns to diagnose AD using an algorithm in an ML system. As a 
result, developing a feature extraction approach is critical for reducing 
calculation time. The input image in this article is a Two-Dimensional Discrete 
Wavelet (2D-DWT). The Time-Dependent Power Spectrum Descriptors (TD-PSD) model 
is used to represent the subbanded wavelet coefficients. The principal property 
vector is made up of the characteristics of the TD-PSD model. Based on 
classification algorithms, the collected characteristics are applied 
independently to present AD classifications. The categorization is used to 
determine the kind of tumor. The TD-PSD method was used to extract wavelet 
subbands features from three sets of test samples: moderate cognitive impairment 
(MCI), AD, and healthy controls (HC). The outcomes of three modes of classic 
classification methods, including KNN, SVM, Decision Tree, and LDA approaches, 
are documented, as well as the final feature employed in each. Finally, we show 
the CNN architecture for AD patient classification. Output assessment is used to 
show the results. Other techniques are outperformed by the given CNN and DT.
394
BACKGROUND: Sepsis remains a complex medical problem and a major challenge in 
healthcare. Diagnostics and outcome predictions are focused on physiological 
parameters with less consideration given to patients' medical background. Given 
the aging population, not only are diseases becoming increasingly prevalent but 
occur more frequently in combinations ("multimorbidity"). We hypothesized the 
existence of patient subgroups in critical care with distinct multimorbidity 
states. We further hypothesize that certain multimorbidity states associate with 
higher rates of organ failure, sepsis, and mortality co-occurring with these 
clinical problems.
METHODS: We analyzed 36,390 patients from the open source Medical Information 
Mart for Intensive Care III (MIMIC III) dataset. Morbidities were defined based 
on Elixhauser categories, a well-established scheme distinguishing 30 classes of 
chronic diseases. We used latent class analysis to identify distinct patient 
subgroups based on demographics, admission type, and morbidity compositions and 
compared the prevalence of organ dysfunction, sepsis, and inpatient mortality 
for each subgroup.
RESULTS: We identified six clinically distinct multimorbidity subgroups labeled 
based on their dominant Elixhauser disease classes. The "cardiopulmonary" and 
"cardiac" subgroups consisted of older patients with a high prevalence of 
cardiopulmonary conditions and constituted 6.1% and 26.4% of study cohort 
respectively. The "young" subgroup included 23.5% of the cohort composed of 
young and healthy patients. The "hepatic/addiction" subgroup, constituting 9.8% 
of the cohort, consisted of middle-aged patients (mean age of 52.25, 95% CI 
51.85-52.65) with the high rates of depression (20.1%), alcohol abuse (47.75%), 
drug abuse (18.2%), and liver failure (67%). The "complicated diabetics" and 
"uncomplicated diabetics" subgroups constituted 9.4% and 24.8% of the study 
cohort respectively. The complicated diabetics subgroup demonstrated higher 
rates of end-organ complications (88.3% prevalence of renal failure). Rates of 
organ dysfunction and sepsis ranged 19.6-69% and 12.5-46.7% respectively in the 
six subgroups. Mortality co-occurring with organ dysfunction and sepsis ranges 
was 8.4-23.8% and 11.7-27.4% respectively. These adverse outcomes were most 
prevalent in the hepatic/addiction subgroup.
CONCLUSION: We identify distinct multimorbidity states that associate with 
relatively higher prevalence of organ dysfunction, sepsis, and co-occurring 
mortality. The findings promote the incorporation of multimorbidity in 
healthcare models and the shift away from the current single-disease paradigm in 
clinical practice, training, and trial design.
395
Objective: Alzheimer's disease (AD) begins with subtle memory decline, years 
before dementia onset. The presence of subjective memory complaints (SMC) has 
been proposed as a marker of preclinical AD. However, recent evidence has 
demonstrated early and progressive loss of awareness of memory difficulties in 
non-demented older adults harboring AD pathology. We investigated the respective 
contributions of SMC and spouse-appraised memory functioning (SAM) to predict 
memory decline in a large cohort of community dwelling older adults. Methods: 
The Wisconsin Longitudinal Study collected cognitive data from a community-based 
cohort of 3,583 participants in both 2005 and 2011. The participant and the 
participant's spouse were each asked to rate the participant's memory 
functioning using a Likert scale. We predicted change in objective episodic 
memory with models including baseline SMC, baseline SAM, or both SMC and SAM. We 
also evaluated an awareness index (SMC minus SAM). We then tested the 
interaction between Apolipoprotein E (APOE ε4) carrier status and SMC/SAM to 
evaluate whether the effects were driven by individuals at-risk for AD 
pathology. Results: In separate models, SMC (-0.081 ± 0.036, p = 0.025) and SAM 
(-0.084 ± 0.278, p = 0.003) were both associated with memory decline over ~6 
years. However, the AI was not significantly associated with memory decline 
(0.031 ± 0.024, p = 0.19). When both predictors were included in the same model, 
SAM (-0.074 ± 0.03, p = 0.0092) was associated with memory decline, while SMC 
was not significant (-0.061 ± 0.04, p = 0.99). The association between SAM and 
memory decline was stronger in the APOE ε4 carriers than in the non-carriers 
(APOE-by-SAM interaction: F = 6.07; p = 0.002), and follow up analyses revealed 
that SAM was particularly predictive of decline only for APOE ε4 carriers. The 
association between SMC and memory decline was independent of APOE ε4 carrier 
status (APOE-by-SMC interaction: F = 2.29; p = 0.13). Conclusions: 
Spouse-appraised memory functioning was more predictive of memory decline than 
SMC or an awareness index, particularly in APOE ε4 carriers, who are at 
increased risk for AD pathology.
396
BACKGROUND: Postoperative delirium in patients aged 60 years or older with hip 
fractures adversely affects clinical and functional outcomes. The economic cost 
of delirium is estimated to be as high as USD 25,000 per patient, with a total 
budgetary impact between USD 6.6 to USD 82.4 billion annually in the United 
States alone. Forty percent of delirium episodes are preventable, and accurate 
risk stratification can decrease the incidence and improve clinical outcomes in 
patients. A previously developed clinical prediction model (the SORG Orthopaedic 
Research Group hip fracture delirium machine-learning algorithm) is highly 
accurate on internal validation (in 28,207 patients with hip fractures aged 60 
years or older in a US cohort) in identifying at-risk patients, and it can 
facilitate the best use of preventive interventions; however, it has not been 
tested in an independent population. For an algorithm to be useful in real life, 
it must be valid externally, meaning that it must perform well in a patient 
cohort different from the cohort used to "train" it. With many promising 
machine-learning prediction models and many promising delirium models, only few 
have also been externally validated, and even fewer are international validation 
studies.
QUESTION/PURPOSE: Does the SORG hip fracture delirium algorithm, initially 
trained on a database from the United States, perform well on external 
validation in patients aged 60 years or older in Australia and New Zealand?
METHODS: We previously developed a model in 2021 for assessing risk of delirium 
in hip fracture patients using records of 28,207 patients obtained from the 
American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program. 
Variables included in the original model included age, American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) class, functional status (independent or partially or 
totally dependent for any activities of daily living), preoperative dementia, 
preoperative delirium, and preoperative need for a mobility aid. To assess 
whether this model could be applied elsewhere, we used records from an 
international hip fracture registry. Between June 2017 and December 2018, 6672 
patients older than 60 years of age in Australia and New Zealand were treated 
surgically for a femoral neck, intertrochanteric hip, or subtrochanteric hip 
fracture and entered into the Australian & New Zealand Hip Fracture Registry. 
Patients were excluded if they had a pathological hip fracture or septic shock. 
Of all patients, 6% (402 of 6672) did not meet the inclusion criteria, leaving 
94% (6270 of 6672) of patients available for inclusion in this retrospective 
analysis. Seventy-one percent (4249 of 5986) of patients were aged 80 years or 
older, after accounting for 5% (284 of 6270) of missing values; 68% (4292 of 
6266) were female, after accounting for 0.06% (4 of 6270) of missing values, and 
83% (4690 of 5661) of patients were classified as ASA III/IV, after accounting 
for 10% (609 of 6270) of missing values. Missing data were imputed using the 
missForest methodology. In total, 39% (2467 of 6270) of patients developed 
postoperative delirium. The performance of the SORG hip fracture delirium 
algorithm on the validation cohort was assessed by discrimination, calibration, 
Brier score, and a decision curve analysis. Discrimination, known as the area 
under the receiver operating characteristic curves (c-statistic), measures the 
model's ability to distinguish patients who achieved the outcomes from those who 
did not and ranges from 0.5 to 1.0, with 1.0 indicating the highest 
discrimination score and 0.50 the lowest. Calibration plots the predicted versus 
the observed probabilities, a perfect plot has an intercept of 0 and a slope of 
with 0 indicating perfect prediction and 1 the poorest.
RESULTS: The SORG hip fracture algorithm, when applied to an external patient 
cohort, distinguished between patients at low risk and patients at moderate to 
high risk of developing postoperative delirium. The SORG hip fracture algorithm 
performed with a c-statistic of 0.74 (95% confidence interval 0.73 to 0.76). The 
calibration plot showed high accuracy in the lower predicted probabilities 
(intercept -0.28, slope 0.52) and a Brier score of 0.22 (the null model Brier 
score was 0.24). The decision curve analysis showed that the model can be 
beneficial compared with no model or compared with characterizing all patients 
as at risk for developing delirium.
CONCLUSION: Algorithms developed with machine learning are a potential tool for 
refining treatment of at-risk patients. If high-risk patients can be reliably 
identified, resources can be appropriately directed toward their care. Although 
the current iteration of SORG should not be relied on for patient care, it 
suggests potential utility in assessing risk. Further assessment in different 
populations, made easier by international collaborations and standardization of 
registries, would be useful in the development of universally valid prediction 
models. The model can be freely accessed at: 
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level III, therapeutic study.
397
INTRODUCTION: In the Aguascalientes, most people who seek treatment go to 
non-governmental residential centers, and about half request treatment for meth 
use. Although some barriers to treatment seeking among these users are known, 
few studies have been conducted with the Mexican population, specifically with 
users of residential centers. The aim of this study was to explore the main 
barriers reported by these patients, the relationship between reported barriers 
and meth use, as well as identify possible user profiles based on the barriers 
and the pattern of consumption.
METHODS: We designed a brief survey that evaluated sociodemographic data, 
consumption pattern, help-seeking for consumption and use of services, barriers 
in the search for services, depression, and suicide attempts. Here, we report 
the results of barriers and consumption patterns. The study sample consisted of 
865 individuals receiving treatment for meth use in 23 certified residential 
centers.
RESULTS: Patients reported an average of 2.12 barriers, the main ones being not 
considering the services useful for them (41.6%), not considering it important 
to attend (35%), and not finding time to attend the consultation (29.8%). We 
found a statistically significant relationship, although weak, between the 
number of barriers reported by participants and the age of onset of meth use, 
dangerous perception of meth use, attempts to quit, and the number of problems 
associated with use. We used a cluster analysis that was performed using the 
k-means machine learning algorithm, which revealed two clusters. The first was 
formed by patients who started using meth at a young age which has more problems 
associated with meth use and more barriers in seeking services, while the other 
was formed by patients who started at an older age which have fewer problems and 
fewer barriers. We found statistical differences between groups, where it was 
found that young group reported consuming more substances, more problems 
associated, and more barriers in seeking services.
DISCUSSIONS: This study revealed the main barriers to seeking treatment among 
patients in residential centers and found that the age of onset of meth use is a 
risk factor for presenting more barriers and more problems associated with 
consumption.
398
